circa 1940s  Promotional Postcard - Spirit Lake and Mount St. Helens  Ektachrome by Walt Dyke

Dawn on Spirit Lake  The Guardians of the Columbia - Mount Hood, Mount Adams and Mount St. Helens  John H. Williams  1912

1946  Promotional Postcard - Rowboating on Spirit Lake  MSHNVM

Day 30     April 18, 1980  Friday
USGS daily report
Eruptions of steam and ash were rising only about 500 feet above the crater today, and seismic activity stayed at a moderate level. USGS scientists at Vancouver have decided to reduce their information releases from daily to twice weekly, "because all pertinent factors seem to remain about the same each day". Scientists are encouraged in their grueling work by the excitement derived from Mount St. Helens' spectacular, historic reawakening and by the opportunity for major scientific achievement. Few of the scientists, if any, had seriously expected to see a Cascade volcano in eruption, much less to be part of an intensive study of the volcanic activity. They are fascinated by what has occurred already, and each hope for a spectacular event that will advance his or her scientific specialty. They also feel frustrated, however, by the frequent bad weather that obscures the mountain from view and hampers ground travel and fieldwork. Scientists who lack aircraft support are especially frustrated. Many aspects of the volcano can be seen only from the air, and scientific work on the mountain itself is not practical without helicopter support. For reasons of public safety, teams whose work deals with assessment or warning of the hazards have first call upon aircraft owned or chartered by Federal agencies. Scientists whose work does not relate closely to the hazardous potential of the volcanic activity may have long waits before they can be fitted into the busy flight schedule. Some distinguished scientists and government officials have arrived at Vancouver expecting to be given tours of the volcano, only to find that senior USGS scientists have Federal aircraft completely booked for urgent hazard assessments.   [USGS PP 1249]

April 18, 1980 Friday TNT news clipping

Historic photographs
Boating on Spirit Lake looks pretty fine. Harry Truman had a beautiful wooden Chris Craft perfect for taking guests for scenic view cruises. 

1954  Mount St. Helens, as seen by boaters on Spirit Lake.  Seattle Times photo

1957  Harry Truman and wife Eddie, with their dog Boy, giving a tour of Spirit Lake.  MSHNVM

1955  Harry Truman boating in his Chris Craft on Spirit Lake.  MSHNVM

1930  Man rowboating on Spirit Lake.  Mount St. Helens  D. Watson  MSHNVM

1938  Columbia National Forest boat "St. Helens" on Spirit Lake.

Mount St. Helens and canoe on Spirit Lake near Harmony Falls Landing.  Gifford Pinchot National Forest

July 1959  Boy Scouts sail boats on Spirit Lake.  Frank Flack and George Churchill  Gifford Pinchot NF 492772 

Links to pre-eruption references and maps
1919 Mount St. Helens
1958 Mount St. Helens maps
USGS Profess. Paper 1249
Volcano Watch   Ray Claude
Digital Terrain Model
USGS Bulletin 1383-C
Lakes in Washington Vol 4 
