Mary & Ron Rinear’s kids and Sasquatch   Maple Flats North Fork Toutle River

Day 34     April 22, 1980  Tuesday
[no photograph of the day]
USGS daily report
Improved weather today brought better aerial views of Mount St. Helens, although low clouds still prevented observers on the ground from seeing the volcano clearly. Dawn disclosed a new mantle of snow on the mountain, covered in only one spot with a light dusting of ash. The only eruptions reported during the day were small bursts of steam during the noon hour that barely cleared the crater rim. Steam vents, not directly associated with the eruptions, can be seen on the eastern part of the summit area. The tiltmeters continued to record small changes but have not, as yet, shown a consistent pattern. In discussing the leveling off of eruptive and seismic activity, USGS volcanologist David Johnston reminded reporters that, "Mount Lassen in California went through a year of this kind of activity before it turned into a magmatic eruption in 1915."   [USGS PP 1249]

The Legend of Sasquatch 
and Historic photographs 
Native American legend told of ‘huge, ape-like creatures” living near the Loo-wit volcano.  
In 1924, a bunch of "large, hairy apes" attacked a group of six miners on Mount St. Helens’ steep eastern slopes. The miners insisted that they managed to shoot one of the creatures, but it rolled into a very steep ravine. They spent half a day searching but could not locate the creature’s body.  
Ape Canyon was instantly named, and the legend of Sasquatch was born. The miners also claimed the apes destroyed their cabin by tossing huge rocks down on it from far above.
Years later, one of the Spirit Lake rangers for the U.S. Forest Service decided to play a prank on some colleagues and visitors. The ranger cut large wooden Bigfoot prints and strapped them on his feet super early one Sunday morning. He left prints all around the south shore of Spirit Lake while everyone was still sleeping, and waited for them to be discovered. This only added to the legend.

On present day excursions to any side of the volcano, everything is Sasquatch this or Bigfoot that. Souvenir shops, espresso stands, motels, hamburgers, and beer. More to that story a bit later when you meet Mary and Ron Rinear again...

Eastern flank of Mount St. Helens and Shoestring Glacier.  USGS  D.R. Mullineaux  mmdr0001


1972  Top of Ape Canyon on eastern flank of Mount St. Helens.  MSHNVM

1979  Top of Ape Canyon, on east slope of Mount St Helens.  MSHNVM

Eastern flank of Mount St. Helens  1958 USGS Mount St. Helens 15-minute topographic map

Links to pre-eruption references and maps
1919 Mount St. Helens
1958 Mount St. Helens maps
USGS Profess. Paper 1249
Volcano Watch   Ray Claude
Digital Terrain Model
USGS Bulletin 1383-C
Lakes in Washington Vol 4 
