May 6, 1980  Mount St. Helens from Coldwater II observation station  USGS Norman Banks  msh_bng00001_ct

May 6, 1980 Tuesday  View east over Mount St. Helens' crater.  USGS  Norman G. Banks  msh_bng00002_ct

Day 48     May 6, 1980  Tuesday

USGS daily report
Although clouds obscured the mountain most of the day, there was no reason to suspect that it had erupted. The northern flank continues to bulge at the rate of four to five feet a day; earthquakes continue at about the same rate as they have in recent weeks. The relatively gentle behavior of Mount St. Helens so far in this eruptive sequence makes it difficult for those who are unfamiliar with explosive volcanoes to realize the potential danger. For the last two weeks especially, the mountain has done nothing to convince a non-scientist that a volcanic hazard exists. If the scientific instruments were not measuring the ominous displacement of the bulge and if the news media were not reporting the scientists' concerns extensively, the public clamor to do away with the roadblocks and entry restrictions undoubtedly would be greater. Jack Hyde, a Tacoma Community College geologist who has done extensive research on Mount St. Helens and has worked with USGS geologists on studies of other Cascade Range volcanoes, was interviewed today by reporter Jim Erickson of the Tacoma News Tribune. "I have a gut feeling...that as the bulge continues to grow, something dramatic is going to happen soon," Hyde said. He speculated that the instability of the northside bulge might result in massive landslides, which could be followed by a "spectacular" explosion of lava, possibly without warning, as lava vents on the northern slope are opened up. When he was told that scientists are watching the northern face of the volcano from nearby ridges, Hyde replied, "I hope they're not in a direct line. That's like looking down the barrel of a loaded gun.” 
[USGS PP 1249]


Jack Hyde pretty much nailed that prediction. His "extensive research" on Mount St. Helens was pretty ground shaking, as he was the third member of the Donal Mullineaux/Rocky Crandell team that wrote Potential Hazards from Future Eruptions of Mount St. Helens Volcano, our required reading from way back when the mountain first erupted on March 27 (Day 8). 
Dr. Hyde developed the Earth Sciences Department at Tacoma Community College when the college opened in 1965 and earned a Ph.D in Volcanology from the University of Washington in 1973. 

[I did not know it at the time, but Dr. Hyde was my neighbor in Tacoma and lived only a block away from my family home on Monroe Street, near the University of Puget Sound. Dr. Hyde was also the mayor of Tacoma for a few years until suddenly passing away from a massive heart attack before he turned 50. A park on the Tacoma waterfront is named in his honor.]

May 6, 1980 Tuesday 
TNT news clipping

Historic Photographs
Mount St. Helens' "Floating Island" lava flow is a prominent landmark on the volcano's northwest side. The lava flowed far downslope from near the Goat Rocks and Wishbone Glacier, reaching for the North Fork Toutle River valley.  

The andesitic lava was dated to the year 1799/1800, immediately after a voluminous tephra eruption marking the beginning of the Goat Rocks eruptive period (approx. 1800-1857). Geologists studying the Floating Island flow found peculiarly narrow and missing growth rings in trees only 40 feet from the lava, and synchronous growth rings in trees further from the flow margin on the northeast flank. The heavy tephra layer T deposited 50-80 centimeters of pumice on the trees’ roots.

1979  Mount St. Helens’ northwest side. Goat Rocks plug in center, Floating Island lava flow below 
Wishbone Glacier. Dog's Head on far left flank.  MSHNVM

September 28, 1979  Aerial view looking down on "Floating Island" lava flow and Goat Rocks debris fan.  
USGS R.P. Hoblitt  msh_hrp00034_ct

1978  Floating Island lava flow on northwest flank of Mount St. Helens.  MSHNVM

1979  Floating Island lava flow on the northwest flank of Mount St. Helens. 
North Fork Toutle River and South Coldwater Ridge beyond.  MSHNVM

September 28, 1979  Aerial view from east of upper part of "Floating Island" lava flow, flank of Mount St. Helens, and South Fork Toutle River valley.  USGS R.P. Hoblitt  msh_hrp00032_ct

Mount St. Helens prior to the catastrophic eruption of May 18, 1980. Streams and Floating Island lava flow 
also visible. View is looking southerly from oblique aerial view. Mount Hood in distance. USGS  vhp_img992

Pre-eruption view of west/northwest side of Mount St. Helens.  MSHNVM

Northwest flank of Mount St. Helens  1958 USGS Mount St. Helens 15-minute topographic

Links to pre-eruption references and maps
1919 Mount St. Helens
1958 Mount St. Helens maps
USGS Profess. Paper 1249
Volcano Watch   Ray Claude
Digital Terrain Model
USGS Bulletin 1383-C
Lakes in Washington Vol 4 
Geologic map  USGS 02-468 
