October 17, 1974  Spirit Lake pre-eruption bathymetry  USGS Tacoma WRD 

Day 33     April 21, 1980  Monday
USGS daily report
The lull in eruptive activity continues. Poor visibility kept scientists from observing the volcano closely today, but the instruments continue to watch. The seismographs indicate that earthquake activity was less today than yesterday, and more like the previous week. On many of these typical cloudy spring days, airborne observers can fly above the clouds and see the mountain peak even though the lower slopes remain hidden. Mount St. Helens and its neighboring volcanoes then seem to be riding on a billowing sea of clouds. Nearest to Mount St. Helens are Mount Adams, Mount Hood, and Mount Rainier, all easily visible and identifiable. Mount Rainier is the giant of the group. Rising 14,410 feet above sea level, it dominates this part of the Cascade Range. Of these three neighboring volcanoes, only Mount Adams, closest to and due east of Mount St. Helens, has not erupted in historical times. Even Mount Adams, however, may not be extinct.   [USGS PP 1249]

April 21, 1980 Monday 
TNT news clipping

Historic photographs
The April 13 post introduced you to Leonard Nelson and Norm Dion of the USGS, Washington Water Resources Division Tacoma office, and bathymetric maps they had created for Fawn and Venus Lakes near Mount St. Helens. Leonard, Norm, and Gil Bortelson, along with Jim Innes and Jim McConnell, performed a water chemistry analysis and bathymetric mapping of Spirit Lake in fall 1974. Spirit Lake had been sounded in the past by Donal Mullineaux, Rocky Crandell and others. Their measurements, from shoal on the southern shore to deep water in both arms, helped confirm botanist Donald Lawrence’s 1938-39 study finding Spirit Lake had been dammed by prehistoric eruptions and mudflows. Despite the soundings, Spirit Lake had never been completely mapped before 1974 and chemical analyses were few.
Gil Bortelson recently described the methodology used for the initial 1974 Spirit Lake bathymetry…
“Large-scale vertical aerial photographs were used to locate cross-sectional data for lake depth. We had as a protocol a minimum number of x-sections to produce the bathymetry. But many more sections were needed if the lake had an irregular shoreline, like Spirit Lake’s horseshoe configuration. Len Nelson was the team expert in charge of field producing the data except if a helicopter was used, in the instance of inaccessible lakes, mostly alpine. The boat or helicopter travelled at constant speed, normally determined by a current meter. The cross-sectional data was digitized in our Tacoma office and that data was sent to Menlo Park where they had the  capability to use a computerized program to produce the bathymetric maps. The fathometer was made by Raytheon. I do not know the model, but likely the high end for the era. The Menlo Park program also computed physical data such as lake volume, mean depth, shoreline length, etc.” 

Spirit Lake had a pre-eruption water surface level of 3198 feet. After mapping, the big lake was found to have a maximum depth of 190 feet in the East Arm; 120-foot depth in the West Arm. Spirit Lake had a 1,300-acre surface area, 160,000-acre-foot volume, and water clarity to 36 feet in depth (Secchi-disk measurement).  
Neither Norm nor Gil remember taking any photographs of their work at Spirit Lake, likely because they already had the glossy aerial photos in hand to aid in their mapping (sadly, Leonard passed away several years ago).  

I have always liked how lakes on really old maps were drawn with blue lines, contrasting strikingly with the brown contours.

Spirit Lake and Saint Helens Lake vertical aerial photo with township/range lines

Spirit Lake  1919 USGS Mount St. Helens topographic quadrangle

Camps, Campgrounds, and Lodges on pre-eruption Spirit Lake 

October 17, 1974  Spirit Lake pre-eruption bathymetry from USGS/DOE WSB 42, Part 5

Links to pre-eruption references and maps
1919 Mount St. Helens
1958 Mount St. Helens maps
USGS Profess. Paper 1249
Volcano Watch   Ray Claude
Digital Terrain Model
USGS Bulletin 1383-C
Lakes in Washington Vol 4 
