April 30, 1980  David Johnston dropping into Mount St. Helens' new crater to sample water in lake at bottom. 1230 hours.  USGS R.P. Hoblitt  mmil0010

April 30, 1980  David Johnston sampling water in lake at bottom of Mount St. Helens' new crater.  1235 hours.  USGS  R.P. Hoblitt  msh_mcd00011_ct  mmil0011

April 30, 1980 Wednesday  Jim Moore looking south at Mount St. Helens' crater  USGS  P.W. Lipman msh_lpw00038_ct

April 30, 1980  Wednesday  Timberline parking lot (theodolite and geodimeter station)  1130 hours  
USGS  C.D. Miller  msh_mcd00019_ct

April 30, 1980  View to northwest from summit. North Fork Toutle River valley, Coldwater II on 
South Coldwater Ridge and Floating Island Lava Flow. 1400 hours.  USGS C.D. Miller  mmil0047

Day 42     April 30, 1980  Wednesday
​[A couple of famous photograph taken 45 years ago today of David Johnston dropping into the crater to sample water in the small pond. I like the third photo of long-legged volcanologist Jim Moore and his equally long ice axe. Keeping up with him on the trail would be tough]

USGS daily report  The crater was not active today, except for steam venting from many fumaroles. Earthquakes continued, although only 6 stronger than magnitude 4, and only 15 stronger than magnitude 3 were recorded. Since March 20, about 240 earthquakes of magnitude 4 or greater have been recorded. The northern flank of the volcano continues to swell and move outward. To compare the large movement at Goat Rocks with possible movement elsewhere on the mountain, scientists commenced ground measurements near Sugar Bowl and Dogs Head, ancient lava domes that are prominences on the northeastern side of the cone near the base and the upper flank of the bulge. 
During the lull in eruptive activity, volcanologist David Johnston flew by helicopter to the crater rim and climbed down into the crater to collect samples of water from a small lake that had formed in the crater bottom. Formed by melting ice, the lake had a temperature of 17°C (62°F), and gas bubbled through it. Analyzed later, the sample of lake water was found to have a pH of 5.1 (slightly acid), 120 milligrams of chlorine per liter, and 32 milligrams of sulfur in the form of sulfate per liter. These analyses indicate that the water has a low to moderate concentration of dissolved minerals. The radioactive gas radon was present in the minor amount of 100 picocuries per liter, well within the range found in geothermal waters in other regions. 

USGS scientists, concerned over the increasing instability of the bulge area and the possibility that large avalanches of snow, ice, and rock could disrupt State Route 504 south and west of Spirit Lake, today issued an updated Hazards Warning to State and local officials and to the Forest Service. Governor Dixie Lee Ray and the Forest Service's Forest Supervisor Robert Tokarczyk, acting on this and earlier hazard assessments, closed additional areas near the volcano to entry. A "Red Zone" was established around the peak to distances ranging from about 3 to 8 miles and included the Spirit Lake area. Only scientists, law enforcement officers and other officials, and search-and-rescue personnel are permitted in this zone. In a "Blue Zone," which extends beyond the Red Zone, logging operations are allowed to continue, and property owners holding special permits may enter, but no overnight stays are allowed. As an added precaution, Governor Ray also declared the entire State an emergency area because, under certain conditions, winds could scatter tephra from volcanic activity over hundreds of miles. 
Toutle Lake School, located about 25 miles from the mountaintop, held a "volcano drill," the first of its kind in the United States. Despite the ominous bulging on its northern side, the mountain remains quiet as the month closes. The eruptions of March and April spread ash for at least 30 miles in every direction and as far as 60 miles to the south southeast and 70 miles to the north. So far, the ash has been derived from pulverized old rocks. Although 35 days have passed since the first eruption, no new lava has been seen or found in the ejected ash. 
The installation and use of instruments to measure and monitor the volcano have continued throughout the month. As April closes, the instruments being used to measure at various sites include: 
• Six 5-day seismic recorders operating within 10 miles of the summit of Mount St. Helens and ten telemetered 

seismometers within 35 miles of the summit. Receiving and recording equipment at the University of Washington seismology center in Seattle has been expanded to handle the blizzard of data, and a computer link has been established with the USGS group in Vancouver to speed data transfer and communications between the two centers. 
• A network of five tiltmeter stations and their automatic telemetering instruments at distances ranging from less than two to about nine miles from the summit. 
• Fourteen reflector-type surveying targets on the mountain, many of them precariously accessible only by helicopter, used in making precision measurements that detect changes such as slumping or swelling of parts of the volcano. Distances between base stations and the targets on the mountain are measured with a geodimeter (electronic laser instrument). Horizontal and vertical angles are measured with a theodolite (manual optical instrument). 
• A network of six gravity stations spread over the northwestern, northern, northeastern, and eastern sides of the volcano at distances ranging from less than two to about five miles from the summit. Each station is visited twice in a typical day, and the gravity is measured with one of three electronic-readout precision gravimeters. These measurements are repeatedly checked against measurements of presumed stable gravity made at a base station about 12 miles west of the summit. 
• Three recording magnetometers located northeast, east, and west of the volcano at an average distance of about 2.5 miles from the crater. Magnetic field intensity is automatically recorded on tape every 10 minutes. 


• A preexisting network of hydrologic measuring sites expanded by the addition of 33 stream sites for collecting water-quality data (chemical, biological, and sediment characteristics) and monitoring changes in streamflow. Nineteen of these additional sites are on streams that drain Mount St. Helens: 14 are on other streams likely to be affected by ash from the volcano. Two of the additional sites have monitoring instruments that automatically send telemetered data by way of an orbiting Earth satellite to the USGS office in Tacoma. 
• Two time-lapse cameras that are making a photographic record (when visibility permits) of the eruptions and profiles of the volcano.   [USGS PP 1249]

April 30, 1980 Wednesday TNT news clipping

Historic Photographs
The following two photographs were taken in September 1979 at the start of the study on the Shoestring Glacier. They really illustrate the braided streams at the source of Pine Creek and the Muddy River, and the amount of rubble that was being carved off the volcano by the Shoestring.

September 28, 1979  Aerial view of Mount St. Helens from southeast looking at Shoestring Glacier, debris fan, and "worm complex" lava flows.   USGS Richard Hoblitt  msh_hrp00043_ct

September 28, 1979  Aerial view of Mount St. Helens from southeast looking up Shoestring Glacier and debris fan; "worm complex" lava flows to left.  USGS Richard Hoblitt  msh_hrp00042_ct

Southeastern flank of Mount St. Helens  1958 Mount St. Helens 15-minute topographic map

Links to pre-eruption references and maps
1919 Mount St. Helens
1958 Mount St. Helens maps
USGS Profess. Paper 1249
Volcano Watch   Ray Claude
Digital Terrain Model
USGS Bulletin 1383-C
Lakes in Washington Vol 4 
Geologic map  USGS 02-468 
