May 26, 1980  Aerial view of mudflow deposits and damage along the north bank, North Fork Toutle River  
USGS  D. Dzurisin  mboe0012

May 26, 1980  House buried up to its eaves and carried by the May 18 Toutle River mudflow.  
Gifford Pinchot NF 529687

May 26, 1980  Plane covered with ash at the Kelso Airport.  USGS P.W. Lipman  msh_lpw00069_ct

May 26, 1980  Marks in the volcanic ash in front of and behind the camper were left by a helicopter
and a searcher who found the two victims on Tuesday, May 20.  AP Photo  m26_00526026

May 26, 1980  Tree blasted by the pyroclastic density current. Ground covered by fine air-fall ash, 
with surface cracking of ash layer still visible before erosion.  USGS S. Kieffer  msh_boe_volc0012_ct

May 26, 1980  Oblique aerial of the South Fork Toutle River lahar. Sheep Canyon Creek lahar on far right.  USGS  cvoa_0022_ct

May 26, 1980  Deposition in stream channels of the Toutle and Cowlitz Rivers.  USGS  msh_boe27_cp

May 26, 1980  Logs and other debris rammed against the Interstate 5 bridge over the Toutle River.  
USGS D. Dzurisin  msh_boe13_cp

summer 1979  Sketch of north side of Mount St. Helens  USGS  C.D. Miller  mmil0090

May 15, 1980  Sketch of north side of Mount St. Helens.  USGS C.D. Miller  mmil0091

May 26, 1980  Sketch of north side of Mount St. Helens  USGS  C.D. Miller  mmil0092

Day 68     May 26, 1980  Monday 							

USGS daily report
Although both the volcanic eruptions and their seismic accompaniment have settled down, ash continues to fall during the day and to be picked up again by the wind. Observers in the round-the-clock surveillance plane can see the volcano now and then. When it is visible, it seems to be emitting almost entirely steam, although occasional traces of gray ash are sighted. No earthquakes above magnitude 3 were recorded.
USGS scientists examined ash from Sunday's eruptions and found it to be a mixture of pumice, glass shards, crystal fragments, and fragments of older rock - similar to the composition of the May 18th ash. Field crews saw younger pyroclastic flows on top of the May 18th deposits. The pumice in the newer deposits is of two types - one a light-colored, frothy rock and the other darker and denser. 
By 1000 hours, only four Washington State highways were still closed, three of them being in the southwestern part of the State near Mount St. Helens. Interstate Highway 5, which received a troublesome amount of ash between Portland and Olympia, is no longer closed, but blowing ash along that reach of highway remains a hazard to the still heavy Memorial Day traffic. The Federal Aviation Administration lifted the restrictions imposed yesterday on air travel in the ashfall area. Air traffic in the vicinity of the volcano, however, is still restricted.
A National Guard helicopter crew rescued five hikers who were in the Red Zone illegally. All five were nearly blinded by ash; one was hospitalized. Communities near the volcano have suffered from either too much or too little water during the previous week and a half. A flash-flood watch continues on the Toutle River and parts of the Kalama, Lewis, and Cowlitz Rivers. At Longview, water intakes from the Cowlitz River remain clogged and 

have caused the water system to go dry in part of the city. In eastern Washington, ash clogging the sewage treatment plants in Spokane and Yakima has forced officials to dump raw sewage into the Spokane and Yakima Rivers. The Port of Portland reports that closing of the Columbia River to shipping has meant a revenue loss of $4 million a day . The Port of Vancouver estimates losses of $1 million a day. 
Many large blocks of ice on and in the debris avalanche north of the volcano might seem to have been thrown out by the May 18th lateral blast. Most, however, are chunks of glaciers that were part of the huge initial avalanche and were carried along with the avalanche debris to their present locations. Scientists paced off the diameter of one ice block that is mostly buried in debris overlooking the North Fork Toutle River and reported that it is about 300 feet across-the length of a football field. Farther west along the North Fork (beyond the avalanche debris toe) and in valleys where other major mudflows occurred, much of the bottomland is "flat as poured concrete" and just as gray. Mud from the mudflows of May 18 now fills most depressions and is still too soft to walk on in many places. USGS hydrologists today completed their first appraisal of the debris choked Cowlitz River channel downstream from the mouth of the Toutle River. They found that mud and debris from the Toutle had reduced the depth of the Cowlitz channel by as much as 12 to 15 feet and probably had accounted for about 40 million cubic yards of new flood-plain deposits and channel fill between the Columbia River and the mouth of the Toutle River.   [USGS PP 1249]

May 26, 1980 Monday TNT news clipping

May 26, 1980 
Monday TNT

May 26, 1980 Monday TNT news clipping

May 26, 1980 Monday TNT news clippings

It's time to change gears a bit. We had 59 days of old, pre-eruption Mount St. Helens photographs and stories, together with earthquakes, phreatic eruptions, and The Bulge from March 'til May. The cataclysmic 
May 18 earthquake and blast was eight days ago. 
I'd like to begin focusing on the distinct parts of the eruption, while still sharing lots of photographs taken on that day exactly 45 years ago. Many of the discussion photos are cool and have rarely or never been shared. In order to illustrate a volcanic process, some of the photos that will be included were taken at a once future date. Many were from a box full of pictures that were given to Ron Rinear by the family of Longview photographer Jan Fardell. Jan took amazing large black and whites. His chronicle of the race to build spillways at Coldwater Lake and South Fork Castle Lake, and pump down Spirit Lake prior to boring the outlet tunnel is spectacular. The other amazing ones primarily belong to Sandy Embrey of the USGS, especially when we dive into the lakes stuff.   
Normally, Photos of the Day will be first, but occasionally the topic will start…








Slide Block I
The massive landslide began at 0832.30, ten seconds after the earthquake on Sunday, May 18. The volcano’s north flank collapsed in three slide blocks. The three blocks contained 3.3 billion cubic yards of rock and ice.
Spirit Lake Unit
Coldwater Ridge Unit
Marginal Unit
Slide Blocks II, III
North Fork
Unit
Mudflow Unit
The Debris Avalanche   
Part I
Distal Unit

   

Slide block I was deposited first, and parts of the block slid into Spirit Lake, down the North Fork Toutle River valley, and up and over 1300-foot high South Coldwater Ridge (The Spillover). Those parts of Slide Block I are named the Spirit Lake geologic unit, the Coldwater Ridge (Johnston) unit, and the portion traveling down the Toutle is the Marginal unit (see photos with arrows and map). The Coldwater Ridge unit reached a maximum velocity of 180 mph, slowing to 110-160 mph when the landslide arrived at the base of South Coldwater Ridge. The avalanche dug as deep as 6.5 feet into the pre-eruption soil. A second magnitude 5 earthquake was recorded at 08:34.10, almost two minutes after the landslide-induced earthquake. Some researchers initially believed that the second earthquake occurred when the when the debris avalanche slammed into South Coldwater Ridge, but more likely resulted from the massive collapse of the summit. The Spirit Lake unit contained 555 million cubic yards of material and buried the huge lakebed with debris up to 320 feet in thickness. The landslide pushed the water 860 feet up the Spirit Lake’s northern mountain slopes before the water rushed back downslope carrying all the trees, plants, and soil with it.     
Slide Block II is termed the North Fork unit. The North Fork unit primarily went down the river valley, but a portion of the block became part of the lateral pyroclastic surge when the vent exploded through the sliding block. The Marginal unit had mixed with river water and melted snow and was pushed ahead and to the valley sides by the blocky North Fork unit. The Marginal unit was shoved 8,650 feet up Coldwater Creek valley, and also up South Fork Coldwater Creek and South Fork Castle Creek valleys. The newly created Coldwater Lake and South Fork Castle Lake immediately began to form behind their debris avalanche dams. The Marginal unit continued to be pushed ahead and aside by the North Fork unit until about 14 miles from the volcano, blocking every tributary stream that once drained into the river. The North Fork unit then continued down the river valley, 

flowing a total of 17 miles in ten-twelve short minutes, arriving at 08:42-08:44. The Distal unit was a jumble of uprooted trees and soil plowed up from the valley floor ahead of the North Fork unit.
Slide Block III was made up of many failures in the new crater and may have included a major collapse of the   
south crater rim about two minutes after the initial earthquake, but any photographs taken at that time were largely obscured by the blast cloud. Some of Slide Block III went into Spirit Lake, but most was deflected by topography down the North Fork Toutle valley. 

The base of the Debris Avalanche’s depositional ramp (The Spillover) that overtopped South Coldwater Ridge. Harry’s Ridge dropping into Spirit Lake behind, and the Big Phreatic Explosion Pit in foreground. 1982 Frank Gohlke

Aerial view of Mount St. Helens 
and Spirit Lake looking due South.  
1982  Frank Gowin

Directions of Debris Avalanche Slide Blocks I, II & III    from USGS OFR 96-677

Oblique aerial view of Debris Avalanche deposit, which dammed Spirit Lake’s outlet to the 
North Fork Toutle River.  August 1982  USGS

Red fractured rock of debris avalanche deposit underlies blast deposit and pumiceous pyroclastic flow. Middle ground is one of the critical overflow points in the Spirit Lake blockage.  July 1980 USGS M.P. Doukas  dmp00029

A Chinook helicopter hovers over the debris avalanche plug that flowed 8650 feet up Coldwater Creek valley and plugged it, creating newly-forming Coldwater Lake. Photo just days after the May 18, 1980 eruption. Barry Wong Seattle Times

Coldwater Lake beginning to form behind debris avalanche blockage in Coldwater Valley.  June 4, 1980  USGS  H.H. Kieffer 

End of Marginal Unit blockage in Coldwater Valley and new Coldwater Lake.  June 11, 1980  USGS H.H. Kieffer  

Looking up South Fork Castle Creek at Debris Avalanche blockage and newly forming lake.  June 11, 1980  USGS  H.H. Kieffer  

South Fork Castle Lake and debris avalanche blockage.  June 25, 1980  USGS  

Lake formed by damming of Jackson Creek by debris avalanche deposit in the North Fork Toutle River valley. 
An outlet for Jackson Creek Lake was dug by hand.  September 20, 1980  USGS R.L. Schuster  msh_srl00131_ct

Jackson Creek Lake and Debris Avalanche blockage in North Fork Toutle River valley.  December 9, 1980  
Jan Fardell

The next two photographs are the perfect Mount St. Helens shots. The photos were both taken by Mary and Ron Rinear during the summer of 1980. The first illustrates one of the many tributaries to the North Fork Toutle River impounded by the debris avalanche, and the intricate pattern of trees uprooted and blown down by the pyroclastic density current (lateral pyroclastic surge). The second photo shows how the surge snapped off and combed downed trees, and the hummocks deposited by the debris avalanche in the North Fork Toutle valley.

Small tributary to North Fork Toutle River blocked by margin of Debris Avalanche deposit. Trees blown down by Pyroclastic Density Current.  summer 1980  Ron & Mary Rinear Collection

Trees snapped off or blown down by the Pyroclastic Density Current, and Debris Avalanche hummocks deposited in the North Fork Toutle River valley.  summer 1980  Mary & Ron Rinear Collection

Debris Avalanche deposit  

ds            = Spirit Lake unit 


dc            = Coldwater unit
 

dm           = Marginal unit 


dn            = North Fork unit    

from Plate 1 USGS PP 1250
Tomorrow May 27  The Debris Avalanche Part II  

Links to pre-eruption references and maps
1919 Mount St. Helens
Volcano Watch  Ray Claude
Digital Terrain Model
Lakes in WA Volume 4 
Geologic map USGS 02-468 
1958 15-minute maps
USGS Profess. Paper 1249
USGS Bulletin 1383-C
Volcano Watch Ray Claude 
Bulge Deformation Map I-1411

Links to post-eruption references and maps
WA State DNR Information Circular 71
USGS Mount St. Helens post-eruption 7.5’ maps 
USGS Professional  Paper 1249
USGS Professional Paper 1250
Plate 1    
USGS Professional Paper 1250
