Corrected USGS 1958 Mount St. Helens 15-minute topographic map

Day 52     May 10, 1980  Saturday

USGS daily report
The volcano was under cloud cover most of the day, but erupting steam and ash could be seen when the clouds lifted. USGS scientists remeasured the bulge on the northern side when weather permitted and found that the rate of movement apparently has slowed to less than three feet a day - about half its average rate for the previous two weeks. (The apparent lower rate was later thought to be due to an erroneous measurement.) Seismicity continues at about the same level; of 20 events exceeding magnitude 3.0, ten were magnitude 4.0 or greater. University of Puget Sound geologist Al Eggers told reporters that tide-producing gravitational forces will be exceptionally strong on May 21, and he warned that the extreme force might trigger a major eruption if the volcano were already set to erupt. Although most USGS geologists do not totally discount this idea, they believe that other factors, such as magmatic pressure inside the mountain, are likely to be much more important.     [USGS PP 1249]



Who messed up the map??, continued   

From yesterday’s Day 51  May 9 post... 
One day while studying photographs and maps of the Dog’s Head, Sugar Bowl, and Goat Rocks, I came to the startling realization that the U.S. Geological Survey had messed up their 1958 Mount St. Helens 15-minute 1:62,500 topographic quadrangle. 
The 1958 map had three editions, published in 1959, 1961, and 1968, and each has the Dog’s Head and Sugar Bowl misplaced. Tomorrow’s post will begin with a slightly altered topographic sheet with the prominent pre-eruption features in their right locations. 
The 1958 map was still the newest topographic map of the volcano when it blew. 
 
All three 1958 editions (1959/1961/1968) place the Dog’s Head at 8040 feet in elevation instead of 7680. Each edition also places the Dog’s Head between the Nelson and Ape Glaciers, instead of lying between the Nelson and Forsyth Glaciers. The Sugar Bowl is placed incorrectly on all three maps at 7680 feet instead of at 6120. 
I dug into Fred Beckey's Cascade Alpine Guide section on pre-eruption climbing routes on Mount St. Helens and his route descriptions and elevations concur. 
Very recently, I found an online photograph of an old Mount St. Helens 15-minute map that a 1970s era climber had corrected as he marked the Dog’s Head climbing route up the volcano. So the erroneous map was not exactly a secret, except maybe to the USGS, as the error has continued into post-eruption days. The old map was corrected by Mr. Jim Brisbine, when he summited the volcano as a teenager on April 11, 1975. His summit photograph overlooking frozen Spirit Lake was included in the Day 38, April 26 post.

April 11, 1975  Mount St. Helens Dog's Head Route map.  Jim Brisbine  MSHNVM

I had wondered how the errors were never caught in all the passing years. Instead, 65 years later, you can buy the almost new 2020 7.5-minute version and it's even more messed up with the Sugar Bowl placed where the remains of the Dogs Head are (at about 7700 feet), and a label for the Dog’s Head missing. The Sugar Bowl was partially buried in the 1980 eruptions. 

Until a future map edition gets it right, here is a link to a more detailed set of incorrect maps. However, the link does jump ahead and includes post-eruption topographic sheets. 
Who messed up the map?



Dogs Head climbing route  Mount St. Helens  Cascade Alpine Guide  Fred Beckey

Mount St. Helens north and northeast flank climbing routes  
Cascades Alpine Guide  
Fred Beckey

Forsyth Glacier climbing route
Cascade Alpine Guide  
Fred Beckey

Mount St. Helens north/northwest climbing routes  Cascade Alpine Guide  Fred Beckey

Corrected USGS 1958 Mount St. Helens 15-minute topographic map

May 10, 1980 Saturday TNT news clipping

Historic Photographs
The Forsyth was the largest pre-eruption glacier on Mount St. Helens in both area (.34 square mile) and volume of ice. In the 1950s and 1960s, the Forsyth had a long ice finger that stretched way down along the eastern side of the Sugar Bowl to about 5500 feet. The Dog’s Head route was easily the most popular climbing route on the pre-eruption volcano.  

The naming of the Forsyth is a great story…
One evening, while the Mazamas gathered around their campfire at Spirit Lake, a haggard man dragged himself out of the forest, and told of an injured comrade lying helpless on the other side of the peak. The messenger and two companion — Swedish loggers, all three — had crossed the mountain the day before. After they gained the summit and began their descent, a plunging rock had struck one of the men, breaking his leg. His friends had dragged him down to the first timber, and while one kept watch, the other had encircled the mountain, in search of aid from the Mazamas.
Immediately a relief party of seven strong men, led by C.E. Forsyth of Castle Rock, Washington, started back over the trailless route by which the messenger had come. All night they scaled ridges, climbed into and out of canyons, waded icy streams. Before dawn they reached the wounded laborer. Mr. Riley says: It was impossible to carry the man back through the wild country around the peak. Below, the first cabin on the Lewis River lay beyond a moat of forbidding canyons. Above slanted the smooth slopes of St. Helens. Placing the injured man upon a litter of canvas and alpine stocks, they began the ascent of the mountain with their burden. The day dawned and grew old, and still these men crawled upward in frightful, body-breaking struggle. Twelve hours passed, and they had no food and no sleep, save as they fell unconscious downward in the snow, as they did many times, from fatigue and lack of nourishment. At four o’clock, Anderson was again on the 

summit. Then, without rest, came the descent to the north. Down precipitous cliffs of ice they lowered him, as tenderly as might be; down snow-slopes seared with crevasses, shielding him from falling rocks; over ridges of ragged lava, until in the deepening darkness of the second night they found themselves again at timber. But in the net-work of canyons they had selected the wrong one, and were lost. Here, at three o’clock, they were found by a second relief party, and guided over a painful five-mile journey home. 
It was day when camp was reached. In an improvised hospital, a young surgeon, aided by a trained nurse, both Mazamas, quickly set the broken bones. Then they sent their patient comfortably away to the railroad and a Portland hospital. Before the wagon started, Anderson, who had uttered no groan in his two days of agony, struggled to a sitting posture, and searched the faces of all in the crowd about him. 
“Ay don’t want ever to forget how you look,” he said simply; “you who have done all this just for me.”
It is fitting that such an event should be commemorated. With the approval of Mr. Riley and other Mazamas who were present at the time, I would propose that the north-side glacier already described, the most beautiful of the St. Helens ice-streams, be named “Forsyth glacier,” in honor of the leader of this heroic rescue. 
- from The Guardians of the Columbia - Mount Hood, Mount Adams and Mount St. Helens by John H. Williams  1912



Some nice photographs of the Forsyth Glacier follow, with a couple more by Mr. Jim Nieland of the USFS and one fromnGifford Pinchot National Forest. Note that the Dog’s Head is referred to as Black Butte is the next photograph, from 1912. The last one shows off the Dog in the Dogs Head perfectly, with the Sugar Bowl at the bottom of the frame. 

From The Guardians of the Columbia - Mount Hood, Mount Adams and Mount St. Helens   John H. Williams  1912

1950  Glaciation of the Forsyth  Mount St. Helens  MSHNVM

1932  Forsyth Glacier  Mount St. Helens   
Mount Adams in background  MSHNVM
1950  Crevasse on Mount St. Helens  MSHNVM

1979  Forsyth Glacier sunrise  Mount St. Helens  USFS J. Nieland  MSHNVM

June 9, 1970  The Dog’s Head, Forsyth Glacier, and Sugar Bowl below Mount St. Helens.  Gifford Pinchot NF  

1978  Mount St. Helens  The Dog in the Dog’s Head and the Sugar Bowl.  USFS J. Nieland  MSHNVM

Links to pre-eruption references and maps
1919 Mount St. Helens
1958 Mount St. Helens maps
USGS Profess. Paper 1249
Volcano Watch   Ray Claude
Digital Terrain Model
USGS Bulletin 1383-C
Lakes in Washington Vol 4 
Geologic map  USGS 02-468 
