1980  Mount St. Helens  Pre-Eruption 3-D perspective view made from a Digital Elevation 
Model (DEM) produced at USGS Western Mapping Center. Viewed from the Northeast.

Day 54     May 12, 1980  Monday

USGS daily report
The mountain continues to erupt ash and steam, and observers today could see a new cluster of fumaroles (gas vents) on the western rim of the crater. The bulge continues to move out in the same direction at a rate of about five feet a day. Scientists agree that the bulge poses a danger, but they still cannot determine how extreme that danger is. Earthquakes stronger than magnitude 3.0 have increased over the past few days; of the 28 recorded today, eight exceeded 4.0. One earthquake of magnitude 5.0 triggered an 800-foot-wide debris avalanche that plunged more than half a mile down the northern flank of the mountain. The avalanche did not take the bulge with it, nor was it the huge avalanche that scientists anticipated. They believe that today's avalanche demonstrates the increasing instability of the northern flank and that it was just a sample of larger events to come. A University of Washington seismology group moved a portable seismic recorder from a station at Spirit Lake to a ridgetop location northeast of Mount St. Helens. A major avalanche probably would reach the Spirit Lake station and would destroy the instrument if it were to remain there.   [USGS PP 1249]

May 12, 1980 Monday TNT news clipping

Historic Photographs
During a long ago 1980s summer, REI was phasing out of retailing most of their big collection of U.S. Geological Survey maps. I happened into the great old Pike Street store on Seattle’s Capitol Hill one day, and they were selling any topographic sheet marked with a red X for 33 cents. Colleen and I barely had any money at all, but I spent five bucks one day and maybe six the next. And probably two or three more trips after that…I mean, they were basically giving them away.

That’s when I bought this copy of the Mount St. Helens orthographic map, and it is still one of my treasures. The vertical aerial photographs were taken in 1975 and the map was published in 1980. The orthographic has been out of print for a long time and is not to be found any more on the USGS site (even though adjacent orthographic maps like Spirit Lake and Elk Rock are there). 

I tried to take a representational photograph of the map with my tablet, but it does not do the beautiful map justice at all.

USGS Mount St. Helens Orthographic map  Aerial photographs taken in 1975  Map published in 1980

August 5, 1972  Photograph taken to create computer-generated shaded-relief images of filtered digital terrain model of Mount St. Helens.  USGS D.R. Pevear  msh_1250_00028


Vertical aerial spherical photograph of Mount St. Helens’ pre-eruption steaming vent and large crater in May 1980. Spirit Lake is visible at top of sphere.
Jan Fardell  Longview Daily News

Links to pre-eruption references and maps
1919 Mount St. Helens
1958 Mount St. Helens maps
USGS Profess. Paper 1249
Volcano Watch   Ray Claude
Digital Terrain Model
USGS Bulletin 1383-C
Lakes in Washington Vol 4 
Geologic map  USGS 02-468 
