Pre-Eruption Glaciation of Mount St. Helens  1958 USGS Mount St. Helens 15-minute topographic map

Glaciers on pre-eruption Mount St. Helens  
USGS 850-D 
Brugman/Post  1981

Day 41     April 29, 1980  Tuesday
[no photograph of the day today]
USGS daily report
Continuing studies of aerial photographs show that the bulging area on the northern side of the mountain is now about 1 mile long and 0.5 mile wide. The bulge has a northeast-trending axis that extends from the northern side of the summit crater toward the Sugar Bowl, on the northeastern flank of the volcano. The outward displacement of the slope has caused ground positions on part of the bulge to be as much as 320 feet higher than they were last year. From this maximum, the bulge decreases toward the east, north, and west. Ground surveys confirm that the deformation is continuing. Between April 27, when the last survey was made, and today, Goat Rocks has shifted about 9 feet toward the north northwest, and little or no vertical uplift has occurred. The tiltmeter at Timberline Viewpoint, on the northeastern side of the volcano, indicates tilting downward to the north. 
The mountain itself remains relatively quiet; yesterday the volcano produced only 27 earthquakes stronger than magnitude 3.0 and no sizable eruptions. The bulge continues to cause the scientist's concern. They now believe that it represents the most serious potential hazard from the present volcanic activity. They are especially worried about the likelihood of avalanches headed toward the North Fork Toutle River and Spirit Lake. (Spirit Lake itself was formed by volcanic mudflows damming the river.) 
USGS geologist Crandell said, in a prepared statement to be released tomorrow morning, that the Forsyth Glacier upslope from Spirit Lake, "looks so unstable that a sharp earthquake or volcanic explosion could trigger a large avalanche of snow, ice, and possibly rock, without warning. In addition, measurements indicate that the upper 

part of the volcano from the Forsyth Glacier west to Goat Rocks is shifting and may be unstable. An avalanche from this high part of the volcano could result in millions of tons of debris dropping a vertical distance of more than 4,000 feet, from an altitude of about 7,600 feet down to about 3,200 feet, the altitude of Spirit Lake. Such an avalanche could move downslope at a high velocity, more than 100 miles per hour, and could move long distances, certainly as far as [State Route] 504, about two and a quarter miles away." 
Scientists believe that such an avalanche could extend beyond Timberline Viewpoint as far as Spirit Lake and could cause a large surge wave in the lake. The momentum of such an avalanche might carry parts of it across the valley of the North Fork Toutle River west of Spirit Lake and upslope along the northern wall of that valley, as well as down the valley to the west. Emergency-services officials are being frustrated in their attempts to make the public aware of potential dangers. One official, quoted in the Seattle Post-Intelligencer, said, "The hardest thing is to warn people of the danger. The mountain looks so serene, so people can't fathom 4,000 vertical feet of earth, rock, and ice plunging into Spirit Lake in less than two minutes."   ​[USGS PP 1249]

April 29, 1980 Tuesday TNT news clipping

Historic Photographs
It’s time for a slow, pre-eruption flight around the high slopes of Mount St. Helens.
The Shoestring Glacier is a great place to start. The Shoestring is such a landmark, its deeply cut notch instantly recognizable on the east and southeast sides of the volcano. The USGS began an extensive study of the Shoestring in 1979. The 1980 eruption fast tracked the study, and it was released as one of the glossy 850-series circulars the USGS put out as fast as possible after the blast (1981).  
The canyon holding the Shoestring Glacier was first cut approximately two thousand years ago and has since been repeatedly scoured by pyroclastic flows and lahars sweeping down from the summit of the volcano. 
The Shoestring was the third largest glacier pre-eruption (.25 square mile area), after the Forsyth and Wishbone Glaciers, and was formerly called the “Muddy River Glacier.” The USGS used radio echo sounding in 1979 on the lower part of the glacier from about 5300 to 6200 feet in elevation, measuring an average centerline ice depth of 185 feet. Interestingly, both before and after the eruption, the Shoestring Glacier outlet streams did not emerge from the end of the glacier, in contrast to most other glaciers. The streams begin above 6,500 feet, and follow the sides of the glacier, joining about 650 feet down valley from the terminus which lies at the altitude of 5,000 feet.
The eruption altered the Shoestring in some big ways, and that will be discussed later in Mount St. Helens’ continuing story.



May 1965  Shoestring Glacier  USGS  D. Mullineaux

September 1970  Shoestring Glacier on southeast side of Mount St. Helens.  USGS  Donal Mullineaux  msh_mdr00018_ct

This volume of the Circular 850 series contains glacier research, both pre- and post-eruption.


Effects of Volcanism on the Glaciers of Mount St. Helens  
Melinda M. Brugman and Austin Post  USGS Circular 850-D     
https://pubs.usgs.gov/circ/1981/0850d/report.pdf

Sept. 28, 1979  Aerial view of summit and head of Shoestring Glacier.  USGS  R.P. Hoblitt msh_hrp00010_ct
Sept. 28, 1979   Aerial view of summit region and Shoestring Glacier.  USGS  R.P. Hoblitt  msh_hrp00016_ct

September 29, 1979  Aerial view, eastern slope of Mount St. Helens showing the Shoestring Glacier. Swift Glacier on left skyline on south slope of volcano.  USGS A. Post  msh_1250_00147

Links to pre-eruption references and maps
1919 Mount St. Helens
1958 Mount St. Helens maps
USGS Profess. Paper 1249
Volcano Watch   Ray Claude
Digital Terrain Model
USGS Bulletin 1383-C
Lakes in Washington Vol 4 
Geologic map  USGS 02-468 
