Lawetlat’la (“The Smoking Mountain”) - Mount St. Helens
Photo by Mary & Ron Rinear  April 1980

Lawetlat’la (Mount St. Helens) Awakens  Spring 1980                                 
Introduction
Lawetlat’la (Loowit) awoke 45 years ago today on March 20, 1980, leading up to the cataclysmic eruption in only two month’s time.  
Mount St. Helens has been a sacred place to Native Americans for many thousands of years. It is known as Lawetlat’la/Lavetlat’la (“The Smoker”) to the Cowlitz Indian Tribe, Loowit/Louwala-Clough to the Klickitat Tribe, and Si Yett to the Confederated Tribes and Bands of the Yakama Nation. While the volcano figures prominently in traditional stories of all the tribes living within eyesight, it has special significance for the Cowlitz People because it is the most prominent landmark of their ancestral home. 

Day 1     March 20, 1980  Thursday  
Seismographs at the University of Washington in Seattle registered at 3:47 p.m. today, the first sizable earthquake to shake Mount St. Helens since recording devices were installed in 1972. The quake was distinctly felt near the volcano. It measured magnitude 4.2 on the Richter scale, was followed by many aftershocks, and originated at shallow depth from a point immediately northwest of the summit of Mount St. Helens. That quake and the others that followed were unlike any earthquake sequence ever recorded in the Northwest. The initial quake differed from other such earthquakes in the Cascade Range because of its unusually shallow origin (how shallow is yet unknown) and its many aftershocks.
[from Volcanic Eruptions of 1980 at Mount St. Helens; The First 100 Days  U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1249]














March 20, 1980  U.S.F.S. Ranger Sharon Burchard is chatting in the Spirit Lake visitor center with climbers who had abandoned a summit attempt on Mount St. Helens earlier that afternoon. 
At 1547 hours, an earthquake rattles the building for about 6 seconds. Burchard observes numerous avalanches on the volcano’s slopes above.
The magnitude 4.2 earthquake is recorded by seismograph Station SHW on the west flank and analyzed by University of Washington's seismology lab in Seattle. The epicenter is located less than five miles from the ranger station, only a mile deep and between Studebaker and Castle Creeks on the northwest flank of the mountain. The shallow epicenter’s approximate location is 46°13’36' N, 122°14’20' W.


Mary and Ron with giant Toutle River salmon  mid-1970s  Mary & Ron Rinear Collection
May I please introduce Mary and Ron Rinear, and thank them for their immense help with this project. 

Mary helped open my school, Evergreen Forest Elementary School in Lacey, in 1978 and taught legions of Kindergarteners and 1st graders and still substitutes regularly. I’ve had the honor of teaching with Mary at Evergreen Forest for almost 35 years. Ron opened the doors at the new Nisqually Junior High in 1967, teaching and coaching there and at Timberline High School. Mary grew up on Seattle’s Queen Anne Hill and went to the famous Queen Anne High School on the top of the hill. Ron grew up in Chehalis and in the Cascade Mountains.

Mary and Ron bought land on the North Fork Toutle River and started building a cabin at Maple Flats near Kid Valley in 1974. Mary and Ron and their young family would have been at their cabin on Sunday May 18, 1980 had a soccer game not been rescheduled. Many of the photographs that I will share were taken by Mary and Ron and their friends. When the pandemic locked schools down in 2020, I began putting together detailed daily posts for my students and families to mark the 40th anniversary of the eruption. I called Mary and Ron every few days to ask detailed questions about their photographs and to hear their great stories. We would also meet in their driveway. They would dig up more photographs while I scribbled notes, six feet apart of course. This is the third or fourth version of those 2020 daily posts to my school kids. 
Besides photographs taken by the Rinears, the pre-eruption photos are primarily from the U.S. Geological Survey archives, and the Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument archives. The photographs are in the public domain, with the intent they are used for educational purposes. Some days there are lots and lots of photographs, probably too many, but I am also trying to create an organized library of images. All of the links to research reports and maps are free to access. Almost every map that I have blown up for detail will link to the full U.S.G.S. topographic quadrangle by clicking on the map.  

Each daily presentation follows a pattern, beginning with any photographs taken on that day in 1980, followed by Tacoma News Tribune clippings, the U.S.G.S. daily report and press release, historic pre-eruption photographs and stories and legends, and links to topical Mount St. Helens research. 

Post-eruption presentations largely follow the same pattern. Beginning on the eighth day following the cataclysmic eruption (Day 68 May 26), each of the distinct volcanic events will be explored in detail. 
The Earthquake and resulting Landslide and Debris Avalanche; the Pyroclastic Density Current (lateral pyroclastic surge); the Blast Pyroclastic flows and deposits; the Plinian Column and Air-Fall Ash; the Pumiceous Pyroclastic Flows; and the Lahars. 

Then, the stories will explore lahar superelevations, “The Stranded Logs”, the pumiceous pyroclastic flows in June, July, August and October 1980, Mary and Ron Rinear’s North Fork Toutle and Green River adventures, Crescent Ridge, the 1982 and 1984 eruptions and lava dome building, USGS colleagues.
Then, a whole bunch of stories and photographs of Mount. St. Helens’ lakes. And Spirit Lake Yacht Club tales.
At the end, Before & Afters and favorite photographs.  





…but first, a giant thank you to our son, Samuel, a volcano climbing and river walking pal. 
Thank you, Samuel, for helping design this website and making it all work.




Pre-eruption U.S. Geological Survey topographic maps

USGS Mount St. Helens 15-minute quadrangle 1958
https://ngmdb.usgs.gov/ht-bin/tv_browse.pl?id=7b30326553689967274cbf6c13b2de88

USGS Spirit Lake 15-minute quadrangle 1957
https://ngmdb.usgs.gov/ht-bin/tv_browse.pl?id=b2dbe175e2331c07196f1fcda09aa090

These maps come from TopoView, a great, free website from the U.S.G.S.
You can find historical and present-day maps, 
and switch between maps and satellite photos. 

Pre-eruption U.S. Geological Survey 15-minute topographic maps - 1950s
1:62,500

Click on each map to open link 
Toutle, WA
Elk Rock, WA
Spirit Lake, WA
Cougar, WA
Mt St Helens, WA
