Checkerboard land ownership of the Mount St. Helens area pre-eruption - Northern Pacific (BNSF) owned the summit 
i
Gifford Pinchot
National Forest
Northern Pacific 
(Burlington Northern)
owned the summit
Railroad, Timber, 
or State property

Day 38     April 26, 1980  Saturday
USGS daily report
The mountain is relatively quiet today. Clear weather allowed observers a good view of the crater, but they saw only fumaroles emitting steam and eruptive bursts too weak to lift ash outside the crater. The seismographs indicate that earthquake activity was about as low as it has been since March 24. Tiltmeters on the mountain's eastern and southern flanks showed small, unsystematic changes, but the tiltmeter at Timberline Viewpoint recorded downward tilt to the north.   [USGS PP 1249]

Historic photographs
When President Abraham Lincoln signed the Pacific Railway Act in July 1862, it granted the Union and Central Pacific Railroad a cash subsidy and ten square miles of land for each mile of track built (later amended to twenty square miles). The second Railway Act in July 1864 chartered the Northern Pacific to build a railroad to link the Great Lakes with Puget Sound. The Northern Pacific received no cash, but claimed forty square miles of land for each mile of track. 
The Northern Pacific was granted square-mile sections in an alternating, “checkerboard” pattern across the West, with the railroad getting one section and the government retaining the next one. The purpose was to subsidize the railroad without having to spend any taxpayer money. The railroads could then sell off the land in order to finance construction while also promoting settlement of the West. Later, the checkerboard land ownership pattern would preclude considering any of the area for wilderness status. In all, the federal government traded some 47 million acres of public land to the new railroads. Much of the land, however, ended up being sold to timber companies and spawning environmental controversies that continue today. As the 1800s ended, huge sales of railroad grant land were made at about six dollars per acre. The Weyerhaeuser Timber Company now owned a substantial tract of former Northern Pacific land on the western flanks of Mount St. Helens, and by 1905 held 2350 square miles of forest in Western Washington. The very summit of Mount St. Helens (Section 9) was still in the hands of Burlington Northern as the volcano awoke, the Northern Pacific's successor railroad following their 1970 merger.  
Mount St. Helens remains the traditional property of the Cowlitz Indian Tribe and Confederated Bands of the Yakama Nation.

During his 1843 expedition, celebrated explorer John C. Fremont witnessed some of Mount St. Helens’ frequent volcanic activity. He wrote in his diary, “We had a grand view…a conical form, very lofty, leading the eye up far into the sky.”

The climbing party making the first recorded ascent of Mount St. Helens on August 26, 1853 included John Dryer, the first editor of the Portland newspaper, The Oregonian. He was accompanied on the climb by Messrs. Wilson, Drew, and Smith, and said, “The ocean, distant over 100 miles, was plainly seen.” The Dryer party ascent was the first summit of a major snow peak or glacier on the Pacific Coast. A small glacier on the SSW flank of Mount St. Helens bears Dryer’s name and is the source of the Kalama River. 
The Oregon Alpine Club placed a register on the summit in July 1889. So many parties climbed the mountain in the late 1890s and 1900s, like large groups from Portland’s Mazama club, that summer firesmoke often veiled Mounts St. Helens, Adams, and Hood.

Several great summit photographs follow, mainly from the mid- to late-1970s. 



July 26, 1889  Oregon Alpine Club mountaineering party on the summit of Mount St. Helens.  A.C. Warner

1904  Summiting Mount St. Helens  MSHNVM
July 11, 1976  Negotiating the crevasses of the Forsyth Glacier.  Dan Moore  MSHNVM

April 11, 1975  Mount Rainier and Spirit Lake from summit of Mount St. Helens  Jim Brisbine  MSHNVM

August 1977  Climbers on Mount St. Helens with Spirit Lake and Mount Rainier  USFS J. Nieland  MSHNVM

1979  Climbers on the northeast flank of Mount St. Helens, with Spirit Lake below and Mount Rainier in the distance.  Lee Siebert  MSHNVM 

May 1978  Mount St. Helens from the south. Trough of Shoestring Glacier just visible on right flank.  Bob Bolton

1977  Mount St. Helens from the south, from east of West Linn, Oregon.  USGS K.A. Cameron  cvof0006

December 1979  Pre-eruption Mount St. Helens from rural Clark County winter. Three months before it renewed volcanic activity.   Bob Bolton  MSHNVM

June 1978  Mount St. Helens with the sunrise horizon shadow meeting the shadow of Mount Adams.   
Taken from the south side of Mount Adams.  Bob Bolton  MSHNVM

from The Guardians of the Columbia - Mount Hood, Mount Adams and Mount St. Helens  John H. Williams  1912

1975  The summit of Mount St. Helens, was once a peaceful place where climbers went for a stroll after climbing the mountain that once stretched 9,677 feet into the sky.  Bruce McCurtain  AP

Links to pre-eruption references and maps
1919 Mount St. Helens
1958 Mount St. Helens maps
USGS Profess. Paper 1249
Volcano Watch   Ray Claude
Digital Terrain Model
USGS Bulletin 1383-C
Lakes in Washington Vol 4 
