†1 May 25, 1980 Eruption of Mount St. Helens from Mount Adams’ South Butte crater.  Darryl Lloyd

Day 67     May 25, 1980  Sunday  

Mount St. Helens erupted on the second consecutive Sunday. The USGS daily report below covers the day’s events in complete detail. Photographs of the eruption are few to be found since the volcano erupted in the early morning before 0300 hours, and only peeked out for a couple seconds all day long.
• Darryl Lloyd took this beautiful photograph from the South Butte crater on Mount Adams at 7800 feet. Lloyd’s climbing party reported huge lightning bolts at 0230 hours, the eruptive plume drifting northwest at daybreak, and a stunning white lenticular cap cloud hovering at 25,000 feet in altitude. †1  
  
• Fern Marlow’s Tacoma News Tribune daily clippings also included her cool little 1980 calendar, with her ongoing tally of eruptions. †2
• How about the graduating high school seniors at R.A. Long in Longview and the Portland townsfolk? Looks very familiar… †3


†2 Fern Marlow's calendar of Mount St. Helens' 1980 eruptions

May 25, 1980  Oblique aerial view looking into the crater one week after the May 18 eruption of Mount St. Helens. Notice the low cloud deck and steam rising from the crater.  USGS  cvoa0061_ct

May 25, 1980  Ash-covered vehicles in Vancouver, Washington  USGS J. Rosenbaum  msh_rj000078_ct

†3 Graduating Seniors at R.A. Long High School  Longview, WA  May 1980  Jan Fardell MSHVVM
Masked Portlanders as Mount St. Helens erupts and coats Western Washington and Oregon on Sunday May 25, 1980  MSHNVM

Roger Brown (American, 1941-1997)  First Continental Eruption  1980  Oil on canvas

USGS daily report
Shortly after 0230 hours, the volcano began ejecting a huge vertical column of ash, the most vigorous eruption since last Sunday. Airborne observers could see that the column reached a height of 24,000 feet in about seven minutes and began to mushroom at the top. The National Weather Service radar operator in Portland watched it reach an altitude of 45,000 feet by 0245 hours. Because winds were moving in different directions at different altitudes today, the ash was scattered over wide areas of western Washington and Oregon. The eruption was heralded at 0232 by an increase in the amplitude of harmonic tremor, which had been present at a very low level since about midnight. A swarm of small earthquakes began at 0240 and continued at a rate of one or two an hour, all originating about five miles beneath the mountain. By 0800, the intensity of tremor had diminished and the earthquake swarm began to subside, although the volcano continued to erupt. Aerial surveillance was continued from a Forest Service airplane through the early morning, but only once could observers see the volcano itself. That brief glimpse revealed that the ash was rising from two vents-one in the northeastern part of the crater and another in the southwestern part. A new, small mudflow had descended south of the Shoestring Glacier on the southeastern side of the mountain but did not extend beyond the base of the cone. Even aerial observation, however, was halted when Portland International Airport closed because of the ash, which had begun to fall heavily in Portland and Vancouver as early as 0600 hours.
Most people still living near the volcano on the southern side-about 200 in all-were evacuated this morning. Flood warnings were issued for most rivers draining from Mount St. Helens, in case renewed eruptions should trigger new mudflows or floods that might spill out of river channels still choked with debris from the May 18th eruption. The top of the ash column remained between 13,000 and 20,000 feet above sea level most of the day. By early 

evening, the erupted column, as seen on the weather radar, was only a few thousand feet above the crater rim. As of midnight tonight, activity had returned to its former subdued level. Measurements of the sulfur dioxide (S02) content of an ash-laden eruption plume this afternoon showed the highest concentrations found to date. According to Richard Stoiber, a Dartmouth College air-quality specialist, the amounts measured were equivalent to an emission rate of 2,400 metric tons of S02 a day. The ash content appeared to lessen as soon as the column began to mushroom, and the height of the column decreased within the first hour. Still, the quantity of ash was so great that it hampered visibility throughout the day at places in nearly every direction from the volcano except northeast. Most airports in southwestern Washington and northwestern Oregon were closed at various times during the day because of poor visibility and the fear that the ash would harm vital aircraft parts. Airports in the Seattle area also were closed briefly. The latest ashfall at it heaviest is much less than the thickest deposits laid down last week in eastern Washington. It has been troublesome nonetheless and has affected several urban areas that had received only light dustings before. 
Traces of today's ash reached as far north as Seattle in western Washington and south of Portland in western Oregon. The bulk of the ash, however, blew to the northwest. Chehalis, 50 miles northwest of the volcano, received about half an inch of ash. Light ashfall reached the ocean beaches of southwestern Washington and northeastern Oregon. In areas of densest ashfall, the sky stayed dark until midmorning. While the ash was still falling in many areas, the rain started. As one observer said, "It was raining mud." Many traffic accidents were attributed to a combination of roads made slick by wet ash and visibility obstructed by the muddy rain. Drivers reported that they could drive only so long as their windshield washers operated and then only if they could keep their vehicles on the slippery roads. These conditions resulted in a 15-vehicle pileup, with injuries, on Interstate 


Highway 5 near Chehalis. For much of its route between Olympia and Vancouver, Interstate Highway 5 was in the path of the densest ashfall. Officers of the Washington State Patrol and sheriffs' departments closed that highway and others while driving conditions were most dangerous. Portland Mayor Connie McCready limited traffic in that city to 15 miles an hour to help avoid stirring up the fallen ash. The ashfall disrupted business as well as travel. In Kelso, even the Disaster Assistance Center was closed. Road and airport closures temporarily stranded thousands of travelers this Memorial Day holiday weekend. Ironically, many travelers were in ashfall areas because they had been warned away from traditional recreation areas in eastern Washington. Major traffic jams were caused when motorists returning early from the coastal areas converged on population centers in the Puget Sound and Portland-Vancouver areas. Travel in eastern Washington was restricted, too. Interstate Highway 90 was closed through most of the eastern part of the State as winds stirred up blinding clouds of the fine ash that fell last Sunday. Busloads of National Guard troops from Seattle, on their way to help clean up at Moses Lake, were stranded overnight at Ellensburg. Nine pieces of cleanup equipment already had been trucked to Moses Lake, but no one arrived to operate them. Emergency crews in areas blanketed by wet ash worked rapidly to clean transformers and insulators, so that electrical systems shorted out by the sticky ash could be restored. 
The Corps of Engineers reported that the removal of approximately 300,000 cubic yards of material from the Columbia River channel has deepened it to a minimum water depth of 20 feet, about half the 40-foot depth of the normal shipping channel. The dredged material is being dumped on islands in the Columbia River and along parts of the riverbank. The Cowlitz River will have to be dredged upstream at least to Lexington (9 river miles upstream from the Columbia) and probably beyond Castle Rock (to river mile 21) for flood control. The levee along the Cowlitz River near Castle Rock is being built up five feet along a front 2,000 feet long. At Lexington, 300 feet of  

the levee was raised three feet, and, at Kelso, the levee was raised two feet. Cowlitz County has been given 40,000 sandbags to help in flood control. USGS geologist Crandell today presented a new map showing the volcanic hazards of the Mount St. Helens area to Governor Ray. He pointed out that the main dangers from the volcano still consist of ash, mudflows and floods, pyroclastic flows, and lateral blasts. Governor Ray, by executive order, extended the Red Zone around Mount St. Helens out to 20 miles in all directions from the volcano. Only people on official business (including approved scientific work) or holding special permits are to be allowed in the zone. The penalty for unauthorized presence in the Red Zone was set at a fine of $1,000 or a year in jail or both.   [USGS PP 1249]



continued
May 25, 1980 Sunday 
TNT news clipping

May 25, 1980 Sunday TNT news clipping

May 25, 1980 Sunday TNT news clipping

Links to pre-eruption references and maps
1919 Mount St. Helens
Volcano Watch  Ray Claude
Digital Terrain Model
Lakes in WA Volume 4 
Geologic map USGS 02-468 
1958 15-minute maps
USGS Profess. Paper 1249
USGS Bulletin 1383-C
Volcano Watch Ray Claude 
Bulge Deformation Map I-1411

Links to post-eruption references and maps
WA State DNR Information Circular 71
USGS Mount St. Helens post-eruption 7.5’ maps 
USGS Professional  Paper 1249
USGS Professional Paper 1250
Plate 1    
USGS Professional Paper 1250

Note: Over the coming weeks, I will continue posting photographs that were taken on that day 45 years ago.
Many other photographs, mainly from 1980-1981, will illustrate different aspects of the May 18 eruption along with maps, research links, artwork, and newspaper clippings. Hopefully, many of the photographs will be new to you. I am especially excited about the beautiful black & whites taken by Jan Fardell from 1980-83, and photos taken by my USGS colleagues from the Water Resources Division in Tacoma. Many slides were hiding in closets in Kodak Carousel trays and have never been seen until now.

Beginning May 26, we’ll spend three days discussing the Debris Avalanche. Succeeding days will cover the Pyroclastic Density Current (lateral pyroclastic surge), the Blast Pyroclastic Flows, the Plinian Column and ashfall, the Pumiceous Pyroclastic Flows, and the Lahars. Topics then turn to the new and affected lakes…Coldwater Lake, South Fork Castle Creek Lake, Spirit Lake, Saint Helens Lake, Fawn Lake, Venus Lake, and the other blast zone lakes. Plus, stories about superelevations of high-velocity lahars, the volcano’s missing glaciers, Crescent Ridge, and tales of friends and colleagues.
The subsequent summer and fall 1980 eruptions and spectacular pyroclastic flows out of the new amphitheater deserve their own slide shows too (May 25, June 12, July 22, August 7, and October 16-18).
