April 14, 1980  Phreatic eruption of Mount St. Helens from Yale Lake, the middle of three large reservoirs on the Lewis River.  
Tom Leeson

Day 26     April 14, 1980  Monday
USGS daily report
Cloudy weather prevented scientists from seeing the volcano, and no new ash fell today. Instruments, however, continue the volcano watch. Seismometers show a continuation of sizable earthquakes but no eruptions. The recording tiltmeter at Timberline Viewpoint showed a shift that may represent additional slight subsidence in the central part of the volcano. The evidence from this one instrument, however, is not conclusive.   [USGS PP 1249]

April 14, 1980 
Monday 
TNT news clipping

Historic photographs
​​​​​​​Saint Helens Lake occupies a beautiful and classic glacier-scoured cirque and bowl seven miles directly north of Mount St. Helens. The cirque was carved during the Evans Creek glaciation, the most recent alpine glaciation. The Evans Creek glacial advance occurred from 22,000 to 11,000 years ago, when a glacier reached 19 miles down the North Fork Toutle River valley. Many of the cirques in the Mount Margaret area were carved during that time, and are now occupied by Grizzly, Panhandle, Shovel, Venus, and Fawn Lakes, among others. 
The cliffs of Coldwater Peak tower over Saint Helens Lake and drop steeply into the water. The lake basin was luxuriantly covered with ancient Subalpine Fir and Mountain Hemlock prior to the eruption, and was a favored destination of Scouts and backpackers. 
No pre-eruption water quality analysis or bathymetric survey was ever performed, but the lake had been sounded and was known to be in excess of 250 feet deep. At 4567 feet in elevation, the lake had a surface area of 79 acres and had Eastern Brook and Rainbow trout. The inlet had a hiker’s shelter, and the Bear Creek outlet dropped through an amazing bedrock lip 1350 feet down to the West Arm (Bear Cove) of Spirit Lake. 
The second pre-eruption photograph was taken by our former neighbor, Vermont Koistinen, on a 1965 hike with his sons to Saint Helens Lake. The photo was taken from the Bear Creek outlet, with his boys out on the log raft. Monte grew up in Longview and frequently took his family on hikes and climbs around Mount St. Helens. I regret not asking to make copies of other wonderful slides Monte took on those trips. The 1950s and 60s automobiles and clothing are fantastic, along with their dress and alpenstocks for summiting the mountain. No silly Patagonia or Arc’teryx gear for those brave souls!

Pre-eruption aerial view of Saint Helens Lake. View to the south includes outlet of Spirit Lake at left 
and flank of Mount St. Helens in the background.  Washington Game Department  msh_dnp_00004

July 1965  Saint Helens Lake  Vermont Koistinen  Note two boys on log raft.

Saint Helens Lake  1919 USGS Spirit Lake topographic map 

Saint Helens Lake  1957 USGS Spirit Lake 15-minute topographic map 

Links to pre-eruption references and maps
1919 Mount St. Helens
1958 Mount St. Helens maps
USGS Profess. Paper 1249
Volcano Watch   Ray Claude
Digital Terrain Model
USGS Bulletin 1383-C
Lakes in Washington Vol 4 
