YMCA Spirit Lake pamphlet  1925  MSHNVM 

Day 29     April 17, 1980  Thursday
[no “Photograph of the Day" for several upcoming days as the mountain remains quiet. The photographers were obviously saving their treasured Kodachrome and Kodacolor for more exciting days. Luckily, we have Fern Marlow’s Tacoma News Tribune clippings, the daily U.S.G.S. report, and some old photos and stories. The "Spirit Lake Camp" pamphlet from 1925 is pretty neat, with the boy's tall lace-up boots and YMCA logo on his shirt].
USGS daily report
The summit crater of Mount St. Helens erupted frequently but mildly today; 12 plumes were seen between 0700 and 1330 hours. Two of them formed vertical columns that extended about 500 feet above the crater rim, but strong winds then carried the plumes away from the summit. In the afternoon, weather conditions prevented observers from seeing clearly into the crater. Seismic activity remained comparatively low, although two earthquakes of magnitude 4.6 occurred. Scientists took advantage of the relative lull in activity to make a gravity survey around the mountain, to place surveying targets near the summit, and to collect information on the total amount of ash accumulated.
Some fisheries specialists are concerned that accumulating ash washed into the streams by the melting snow may harm the valuable fish population in streams near Mount St. Helens. When Mount Baker suddenly increased its steaming activity in 1975, some of its emanations of gases and "fumarole dust" were acidic. A stream draining the fumarole area of Mount Baker apparently carried enough acid water into nearby Baker Lake to cause some of the fish there to die. So far, however, none of Mount St. Helens' ash has been found to be strongly acidic.
The greatest hazard other than ash, USGS scientists reported today, is the increasing instability of the northern 

flank of the volcano. Contributing to this instability are ground shaking, avalanching caused by continuing local earthquakes, subsiding of the summit graben, fracturing of ice and rocks, and accelerated melting of snow and ice caused by the heat of the volcano and possibly by solar heating of the fallen ash. This announcement marks a shift in the emphasis on hazards. The possibility of volcano-related flooding in the Lewis River drainage system is now thought to be less of a threat than the possibility of large avalanches from the volcano's northern slope.     [USGS PP 1249]

April 17, 1980 Thursday TNT news clippings

Historic photographs 
Chemical analysis had first been performed on Spirit Lake’s water in July 1937 by biologists from the Washington State Department of Game, but subsequent studies were mainly focused on fisheries. The lake was known for its clarity and little or no plant life, especially a lack of algae. Secchi-disc measurements to determine water clarity were made several times, producing measurements of 30 and 36 feet in 1937 and 1974. Since the lake produced little food, it was not well-known for its fishing. Pre-eruption characteristics for Spirit Lake were: 
• Water surface level - 3198 feet in elevation
• 160,000 acre-feet volume
• 1300 acres surface area
• 14.9 square mile drainage basin
• Average water discharge of 117 cfs (cubic feet per second) from Spirit Lake basin outlet to the North Fork Toutle River. Main inlets to the East Arm are Paradise, Harmony, Lange, Donneybrook, and Cedar Creeks. Bear Creek tumbles down from Saint Helens Lake to the West Arm.    
• The Spirit Lake basin received 100 inches of rainfall precipitation annually, 300 inches of snowfall
• Spirit Lake’s depth had been sounded and the lake’s maximum depth was known to be about 180 feet in the East Arm, but a bathymetric survey and map was never made until 1974. 
• Surface and near-bottom water temperatures were 65º and 38ºF. respectively in July 1937.

• The littoral bottom of Spirit Lake was entirely gravel, sand, and rock. The lake produced very little plankton, and benthic invertebrates were not found in sediment samples. 
• Water chemistry in 1974 and shortly before the eruption on March 28, 1980, concluded that Spirit Lake was a high quality body of water. Concentrations of most organic and inorganic dissolved substances were very small, some almost  undetectable. Particulate matter was scarcely present in the water column. Considering several water chemistry variables, Spirit Lake was less enriched chemically than famously pristine Crater Lake. 

1912  Tips of drowned trees protruding from 60-120 feet of water near the head of Spirit Lake’s East Arm. The trees were drowned when volcanic debris dammed the outlet, circa 1550 A.D.   MSHNVM

1925  Bear Creek Cove (West Arm) of Spirit Lake.   Mount St. Helens  Asahel Curtis  MSHNVM

Mount St. Helens from Spirit Lake's Bear Cove (West Arm).  Gifford Pinchot National Forest

August 1973  Mount St. Helens from Spirit Lake's Bear Cove (West Arm)  USFS/USGS

1978  Bear Cove of Spirit Lake (West Arm) and Mount St. Helens  USFS  J. Nieland  MSHNVM

1978  Bear Cove (West Arm) of Spirit Lake and The Dome.  USFS J. Nieland  MSHNVM

1979  West Arm of Spirit Lake and The Dome.  J.C. Tagney  MSHNVM
1970  Spirit Lake outlet to North Fork Toutle River. The Dome in background.    MSHNVM

Camps, Campgrounds, and Lodges on pre-eruption Spirit Lake 

Links to pre-eruption references and maps
1919 Mount St. Helens
1958 Mount St. Helens maps
USGS Profess. Paper 1249
Volcano Watch   Ray Claude
Digital Terrain Model
USGS Bulletin 1383-C
Lakes in Washington Vol 4 
