April 23, 1980 Mount St. Helens and Mount Adams from west with Crescent Ridge middle foreground. R.G. Bowen

April 23, 1980  Mount St. Helens' summit crater.  Roger Werth  Longview Daily News

April 23, 1980  Establishing an unmanned target in the Sugar Bowl. This target was destroyed by a rock and ice avalanche on May 12, 1980.  USGS  P.W. Lipman  mcpp0012

Day 35     April 23, 1980  Wednesday
[The first photograph by Richard G. Bowen is a stunning aerial of Mount St. Helens’ west flank and Mount Adams. My volcano-climbing pal and son, Samuel, could only say “wow” when he first saw it.]
USGS daily report
Good weather allowed scientists to observe the volcano more closely and to note that there were no eruptions large enough to add to the light mantle of ash seen on yesterday's new snow. The volcano's quiet period also permitted researchers to collect gas samples from the steaming areas near the summit itself. Analyzed later, these samples were found to contain a high concentration of sulfur. Two new steam vents were seen in the crater today.
Although the slumping of the summit graben and the breaking up of glacier ice on Mount St. Helens’ northern side have been evident for about three weeks, the first real indication of the amount of deformation came today when optical comparisons of aerial photographs taken on August 15, 1979, and on April 12, 1980 (11 days ago), were completed. These comparisons show that some places on the northern flank are about 250 feet higher than they were last year. The full extent of the bulged area is not known. Scientists and technicians flying in by helicopter placed surveying targets on the northern flank of the volcano today to help monitor its changes in slope. Tiltmeters at Timberline Viewpoint and Spirit Lake indicated a slight tilting of the ground surface downward to the northwest; on the southern side of the mountain, tilting was downward to the southwest. This surface tilting suggests that the volcano may be inflating because of increasing magma pressure beneath it.
The sustained period of relative quiet prompted Forest Service officials to schedule discussions within the next 

few days on opening some areas around the volcano to restricted use. USGS geologist Crandell, Mount St. Helens Hazard Coordinator, warned, however, that avalanches could begin on the unstable, bulging area of the northern slope and surge into areas downslope. Such avalanches could also cause floods by suddenly raising the level of Spirit Lake. An avalanche also could dam the North Fork Toutle River temporarily, and the dam could fail later in a washout that would release a torrent to downstream areas. USGS scientists in Vancouver, in response to demands for more frequent information about the volcano, agreed to resume daily information releases.   [USGS PP 1249]

April 23, 1980 Wednesday 
TNT news clipping

Historic Photographs
The Plains of Abraham and upper Ape Canyon have been repeatedly swept by scouring lahars (as opposed to depositional) and pyroclastic flows in "recent" eruptions of Mount St. Helens. Most of the area was quite barren prior to 1980. That makes sense when a primary landmark is named Pumice Butte. Giant snow avalanches also sweep the Plains of Abraham.
Windy Pass is also very aptly named. The wind moves fast in early summer, mightier than most annoying insects. The eastern flank is super popular today with mountain bikers, either riding up Ape Canyon ridge under towering noble firs that the eruption barely missed or riding through the blast zone from Windy Ridge Viewpoint.  
The next photograph is a classic. "Mountain Goat meets Human on Pumice Butte". My money is on the goat.



1970  Pumice Butte at top of Ape Canyon. Mountain Goat outsmarts Human.  MSHNVM


1978  East Dome and Plains of Abraham.  Mount St. Helens  MSHNVM

1978  Pumice Butte and Plains of Abraham  USFS J. Nieland  MSHNVM

June 1978  View of the Plains of Abraham, on the east flank of Mount St. Helens.  USGS L. Topinka  cvof00117_ct

1978  Windy Pass trail from Plains of Abraham.  USFS J. Nieland  MSHNVM

1965  Timberline parking lot and Windy Pass (far left)  MSHNVM

Near vertical pre-eruption aerial of Timberline parking area and loops, and Sugar Bowl dome upper left. Note avalanche track below Sugar Bowl and lower finger of the Forsyth Glacier. Windy Pass lower left.  MSHNVM 

Northeast flank of Mount St. Helens  1958 USGS Mount St. Helens 15-minute topographic map

Links to pre-eruption references and maps
1919 Mount St. Helens
1958 Mount St. Helens maps
USGS Profess. Paper 1249
Volcano Watch   Ray Claude
Digital Terrain Model
USGS Bulletin 1383-C
Lakes in Washington Vol 4 
