April 25, 1980  Mount St. Helens looking west-southwest. The bulge is a prominent and rapidly changing feature. Fresh snow covered higher portions of Mount St. Helens; lower slopes are ash covered.  USGS Post/Krimmel  msh_1250_00012

April 25, 1980  Geodimeter station on Smith Creek Butte.  USGS  P.W. Lipman  msh_lpw00015_ct

Day 37     April 25, 1980  Friday

USGS daily report
Fumaroles continued to steam today, and seismic activity continued at about the level that it has maintained for several days. About 1,560 earthquakes stronger than magnitude 3 have been recorded since activity at the volcano began March 20. More than 200 have been stronger than magnitude 4. Tiltmeters continue to show slight tilt that, once again, does not have a consistent pattern. To better define changes in the shape of the volcano, scientists are using electronic distance-measuring devices. They were able today to measure the precise distances to five targets on the upper slopes of the volcano, as well as two additional reference points nearby. These measurements, together with others to be made by using markers installed on the mountain today, will help to define the size, shape, and growth of the bulge on the northern flank in days to come.   [USGS PP 1249]


Historic photographs
My buddy, Don Phillips, took the following photographs of distant pre-eruption Mount St. Helens while on Mount Rainier winter climbing trips. The next photo of the twin peaks of their tent and St. Helens is nicely composed. And chances are one of the climbers shown relaxing by their yellow tent is Don, looking up at Mount St. Helens' Forsyth Glacier and Dog’s Head. He climbed both volcanoes many times in the mid- to late-1970s, and Don had that exact tent. I slept in there a lot. A Light Dimension that Don bought on one of our many excursions to the little Early Winters mountaineering shop near the Seattle Center and the Coliseum er, Climate Pledge Arena. The first Gore-Tex tents made. The tent worked nicely, but the raincoats...
And look at that climber's monster backpack. Colleen and I saw Don carry loads that size more than once. 
In June 2019 Sam and Peter, my son and his business pal, were busily getting ready to open their Joe Chocolates shop in the Pike Place Market. Sam blew up an old photograph I took of Don into poster size and put it in the window while they were under construction. Sam and Peter said people would frequently walk by the shop, point to the picture of Don and ask, "Is that Joe?" 

January 1977  Pre-Eruption Mount St. Helens from Mount Rainier climbing camp.  D. Phillips

October 1976  Pre-eruption Mount St. Helens from Mount Rainier.  D. Phillips

August 31, 1977  Forsyth Glacier and climbers on Mount St. Helens  J. Skok  MSHNVM

1974  Climber below Dog’s Head dome with massive pack.  Mount St. Helens  MSHNVM

Winter 1985  Don Phillips at Melakwa Lake, Alpine Lakes Wilderness.  K.Tanner

spring 2019  Don’s son, Daniel, at Joe Chocolates - Pike Place Market     

Links to pre-eruption references and maps
1919 Mount St. Helens
1958 Mount St. Helens maps
USGS Profess. Paper 1249
Volcano Watch   Ray Claude
Digital Terrain Model
USGS Bulletin 1383-C
Lakes in Washington Vol 4 
