June 1980  Early map of features and deposits of Mount St. Helens' May 18 cataclysmic eruption.  
Map by James Moore USGS  mmil0069

Day 90     June 17, 1980  Tuesday

USGS Daily report
Mount St. Helens has remained quiet since its eruption on June 12th. Today was partially clear, but steam and gas continued to rise from the crater and formed clouds too dense to allow observation of the new dome. Shortly after 1600 hours, the volcano briefly ejected a plume of dense ash - the "most significant" since last week's eruption. The top of the dark plume leveled off at about 12,000 feet above sea level, and, because the air was still, most of the ash fell back into the crater. Seismographs recorded no significant local earthquakes and no harmonic tremor. Field crews remeasuring the deformation network on the mountain have found no appreciable change. A week ago, the southern side of the mountain was swelling slightly; now, it is stable. A light rain last night reduced the air pollution caused by persistent volcanic ash in the Portland-Vancouver metropolitan area. Most of the time since last Thursday night's eruption, both cities have been shrouded in a fog-like cloud of ash dust that makes breathing uncomfortable and occasionally disrupts automobile and aircraft traffic. Autopsies have been performed on 22 of the bodies so far recovered from the blast area. Sixteen deaths resulted from inhalation of hot ash, three from burns, and three from head injuries (two of these caused by falling trees). Two other people rescued as they were fleeing later died in the hospital from burn-related injuries. The death toll now stands at 24, and 45 are still officially missing. The Skamania County Coroner has been holding hearings about the last-known activities of persons still listed as missing. These hearings could result in the issuance of "presumptive death certificates" for some or all of the missing.   [USGS PP 1249]

June 17, 1980 Tuesday TNT news clipping

June 17, 1980 Tuesday 
TNT news clipping


Gary Turney and Sandy Embrey in Spirit Lake log raft.  July 16, 1981  WSL 3423  USGS L. Topinka

Gary Turney and Sandy Embrey in Spirit Lake log raft.  July 16, 1981  WSL 3423  USGS L. Topinka

July 16, 1981  Chemical analysis on Spirit Lake's East Arm. USGS Water Resources Division’s Sandy Embrey and Gary Turney hemmed in by log mat in 14-foot aluminum boat.  USGS Lyn Topinka

July 16, 1981  Aerial view of downed logs on Spirit Lake. Note the USGS Water Resources sampling boat.  
WSL 3423  USGS  cvob0036_ct

Spirit Lake  Part IV
Sandy and Gary and Norm Stuck in the Spirit Lake Log Mat
About five years ago, I emailed the Yacht Club and attached the four previous photos of our boat in the logs. 
The photos were long online and in the USGS archives, but didn’t name the boat inhabitants. One noted the USGS WRD sampling boat, the rest were uncaptioned and the fourth photo was misdated. Club members made a lot of trips to the lakes to do chemical analyses, but I knew they would have stories to tell about that day… 

Gary Turney - I think I can help you with this one. I'm 99 percent sure that's Sandy on the right, and about 70 percent that's me on the left. We were dropped off on a side of the lake that had open water (I think it was the east side), and all the logs were on the other side of the lake, or at least out of our path of travel to the sampling points. The helicopter flew off to do other things and was to pick us up where it left us at an agreed-upon time. Sandy steered us out to the center (I'm NOT a boat person) and we collected our samples uneventfully. During this little excursion the wind picked up and on the way back we realized a lot of the logs had blown between us and the pickup point. As I recall we may have tried to find a way around them but ended up with no choice but to go through. It was very slow going, with Sandy idling the boat and me shoving logs out of the way in front of us. At times we made very little progress and we were concerned about the wind shifting again and dragging us with them somewhere else on the lake. Of course we were late for our pickup, and when the helicopter first arrived it made a few passes over the lake, obviously looking for us. We waved, but it became pretty apparent the pilot didn't see us at first. At one point I was standing in the boat, waving a red WSU sweatshirt, and he flew right 

past us. That's when I got a bit nervous. Eventually the pilot saw us (I'm not sure exactly when) and we 
managed to make our way to the pick-up point on shore, so it all worked out. When we got back in the air I was surprised to see all the logs had shifted to our side of the lake and we had been smack in the middle of the log pile.
The story is pretty accurate, Sandy may have more details or corrections. But Sandy will have to verify the pictures are of us. The date sounds about right, but what's giving me pause is the person on the left appears to be in jeans and a light blue shirt. That could be me (I even recall the blue shirt), however for much of the time I had that WSU sweatshirt on. If the pilot didn't see us until after I had taken the sweatshirt off to wave at him, then the pictures had to be taken after that, and yeah, that's probably me. If that's me I think it's the only time I was on Spirit Lake, for reasons which should be readily apparent. [Sandy’s copy of Lyn Topinka’s original slide has “Gary & Sandy in logs” written on it]. 
Sandy Embrey - Don't let Gary fool you with his boating skills; he did much of the motoring on the lakes study and was particularly skilled in navigating the logs on Spirit Lake. One technique the two of us used was for Gary to run the motor and steer, while I straddled the bow and used my feet to push on the logs and move them out of the way of the boat. Sometimes that was a challenge, though, because the logs were piled up into several layers. I had to push down on them to "bounce" the pile as well as try to push them aside for us to get any headway. 


Norm Dion - Sandy and I had an experience very much like the one Gary describes.
As Gary said, collecting the samples was uneventful. So why didn't we notice that the wind had shifted
and the logs started surrounding us? Come time to go, we were log-locked; nothing we did moved the logs.
No problem for Embrey and Dion, right? We'll just do a MacGyver! So we called in Marv Smith, our intrepid pilot 
from Startup, on the walkie-talkie. The only problem was, like Embrey and Turney, he couldn't find us. We eventually guided him over using (compass points? help me here, Sandy), and had him hover 20 feet over the boat at about 20,000 decibels and Marvin did a Moses imitation and parted, not the water, but the logs. It must have made a pretty picture: Sandy sitting on the bow with an oar, parting the logs, and me at the stern with the 10hp outboard in one hand, cranked up to about 8,000 rpm and similar decibels, the other hand pushing the logs aside with the other oar. Bottom line: it worked and we lived to talk, and even joke, about it.

[That little black Mercury 10hp outboard engine was a reliable thing. I don’t remember it ever giving us a bit of trouble. Charley Swift told me a long time ago that our trusty aluminum boat was accidentally dropped from a helicopter sling and turned into a pancake]

June 1981  Sandy’s boat transom piece from Spirit Lake. Note pumice driven into wood and square nails.  USGS S.S. Embrey
While we were working on Spirit Lake, the Yacht Club always kept an eye out for any odd artifacts floating among the trees and bark. Nothing ever turned up. 

June 1981  Sandy Embrey's boat transom piece from Spirit Lake.  USGS S.S. Embrey

Then, one day in June 1981, Sandy walked back into our section of the office with her prize...a foot-long piece of an old wooden boat, thick like a part of the transom. We were totally amazed by Sandy’s treasure.
Forty years later, Sandy looked through her old slides to jog her memory. She and Norm had found the transom piece at the south end of Spirit Lake, seemingly toward the center but maybe favoring the West Arm a bit. Sandy remembered Norm remarking how they were just off the location of Harry's lodge, but they were not really close to any lake margins. In summer 1981, Truman’s Mt. St. Helens Lodge was under 160 feet of avalanche debris and 60 feet of lake water. 
The transom piece had thick blue-green marine paint on one side and red on the other, and old square nails. The red side had small pieces of pumice driven into it. Sandy’s treasure could also have been a window casing from one of Harry Truman’s structures, which were adorned with lots of red and green paint. But the paint seemed a thick, marine-style for boats, and Harry had quite a flotilla of small wooden boats at his lakeshore resort. So we fancied it a chunk of Truman’s flotilla. It was found floating, after all.  

By July 1981, the lake had become thermally stratified and dissolved oxygen levels had improved in the top-layer epilimnion, although the hypolimnion remained anoxic. The water color slowly changed over the next year to "brown, like strong tea". Secchi-disk transparency measurements of 3.5 feet were recorded in September 1981, 14 feet in August 1982, and 16.4 feet in October 1983.

May 12, 1981  Transom piece was found one month later near this location.  WSL 3422  USGS S.S. Embrey

1950  Harry's Truman's Mt. St. Helens Lodge boathouse. WSL 3198  Ellis  MSHNVM

1950s  Harry R. Truman and Edna "Eddie" Truman, Mount St. Helens Lodge.  MSHNVM 
1960 Harry Truman’s Mt. St. Helens Lodge and cabins at Spirit Lake.  MSHNVM

Harry R. Truman and Supreme Court Justice William O. Douglas  1953  MSHNVM

June 11, 1980 Propane tank floating in East Arm of Spirit Lake. WSL 3402 USGS H.H. Kieffer #10A khh_15A_10_14  

June 11, 1980  Propane tank floating in East Arm of Spirit Lake.  USGS H.H. Kieffer  #10A khh_15A_10_14  

The start and finish of our many trips to Mount St. Helens’ lakes almost always happened along the North Fork Toutle River at Maple Flats and Kid Valley. Of course I didn’t know it at the time, but the cabin standing directly across the road belonged to Mary and Ron Rinear and their pal Blair Barner’s buried red A-Frame was right next door. We spent a lot of time there along the old Spirit Lake Highway, unpacking and waiting and packing back up. The noisy jake brakes on logging trucks in the hills often fooled us into thinking our helicopter was approaching, then we’d go back to excited waiting.

When Sandy sent me all of her photos a couple years ago, I laughed when I saw the next two photographs and quickly sent them to Mary and Ron. 
The photos show their brand new Mount St. Helens center between the two cabins. It was pretty sleepy around our pick up spot in summer 1981, but that was soon to change as the volcano seekers started pouring in.   

Our orange USGS Dodge utility truck at Maple Flats on the North Fork Toutle River. Our helicopter pick up spot. 
Mary and Ron Rinear’s cabin on left across Spirit Lake Highway 504, their new Mount St. Helens center, and Blair Barner’s red “Buried A-Frame” behind trees near second pickup truck.  August 27, 1981  USGS S.S. Embrey  

Our orange USGS Dodge truck at Maple Flats on the North Fork Toutle River, at our helicopter pick up spot. Mary and Ron Rinear’s cabin across the Spirit Lake Highway 504.  August 27, 1981  USGS S.S. Embrey

Bathymetric mapping was completed in late fall 1981, and chemical analysis field work for the Lakes Study was completed the following year in late summer 1982. Spirit Lake continued to fill, and by November the water surface level would reach 3462 feet, 42 feet higher than when we surveyed the West Arm. The U.S. Army Corp of Engineers began pumping at Spirit Lake on November 5, 1982 to stabilize the fast-rising lake until a more suitable option could be chosen and implemented.  
Sandy, Norm, and Steve Sumioka continued a cooperative effort into 1983 with Douglas Larson, a limnologist with the Portland U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Larson published some later articles in American Scientist which featured photographs of Steve, Norm, and this excerpt, a very scary story about Sandy…
In addition, helicopters provided a quick and reliable means of escape if someone was hurt or if the volcano stirred. The importance of having a means of evacuation was made clear during the summer of 1983. While en route to a Spirit Lake sampling station aboard Traveler, a USGS scientist who was a member of our research team tried to open a reagent bottle containing a mixed solution of highly concentrated sodium hydroxide, sodium iodide and sodium azide. The bottle’s cap suddenly blew off, spraying her face with caustic reagents. Blinded and screaming, she fell to the deck. Frantic, we scooped water from the lake and splashed it across her face, trying to flush the burning chemicals from her eyes and skin. I radioed a medical evacuation request to our helicopter pilot, who was heading to the airport at Longview, Washington, to refuel. When we reached the boat moorage, the helicopter was waiting with its rotor blades spinning, ready for immediate takeoff. The injured researcher and a fellow USGS scientist were flown to a hospital in Longview, about 65 air-kilometers away. Within minutes, she was in the hospital’s emergency room undergoing treatment. She fully recovered from her burns. - Douglas Larson

Scientists Gail Flory USACE (on log) and Steve Sumioka of the USGS WRD on Spirit Lake with Corps of Engineers boat. 1983  USACE Douglas Larson 

Gail Flory and Steve Sumioka on Spirit Lake 
in Corps of Engineers boat.  
1983  USACE Douglas Larson

Doug Larson and Steve Sumioka on Spirit Lake 
in Corps of Engineers boat.  
1983  USACE Douglas Larson

Gail Flory, Norm Dion, and Steve Sumioka on Spirit Lake.  USGS WRD Tacoma  1983  USACE Douglas Larson

Sikorski helicopter hovering over Steve Sumioka and Norm Dion of the USGS WRD and Gail Flory USACE on a debris avalanche island in Spirit Lake.  1983  USACE  Douglas Larson

Here’s another excerpt from Doug Larson’s Science After the Volcano Blew…

Not all of the hazards encountered in the blast zone were readily perceived. The black, toxic waters of lakes and rivers harbored potentially pathogenic bacteria including Klebsiella pneumoniae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Legionella pneumophila. L. pneumophila had caused the mysterious pneumonia epidemic at an American Legion convention in Philadelphia in July 1976. Called Legionnaires’ disease, the illness sickened 211 people, 34 of whom died.

In April 1981, the State of Washington’s Department of Social and Health Services (WDSHS) was notified that eight scientists had become ill with fever, cough and sore throat after working around the lakes and rivers in the blast zone. Further inquiry found that among 250 scientists who had visited the blast zone between June 1980 and June 1981, 28 reported developing headaches, sore throat and high fever (103–104 degrees Fahrenheit) within a week after visiting the blast zone. All recovered within a few days.
Field scientists suggested that the puzzling illness was Legionnaires’ disease. John Klein of the USGS reported that several members of his agency’s research teams had gotten sick with flulike symptoms soon after visiting lakes and rivers in the blast zone. He indicated that water samples collected from Spirit Lake and the North Fork Toutle River contained “extremely high concentrations” of Legionella bacteria, with one sample yielding 1.3 × 108 organisms per liter. Spirit Lake and other blast-zone waters provided an ideal medium for explosive bacterial growth, most likely due to nutrient enrichment, increased water temperatures from geothermal springs and other factors such as the waters’ exposure to volcanic debris.
Subsequent research by David Tison of Oregon State University and colleagues lent credence to allegations that the 

mysterious illness was Legionnaires’ disease. They found relatively large numbers (up to 1.3 × 107 organisms per liter) of potentially virulent L. pneumophila in Spirit Lake and other blast zone waters during the spring and summer of 1981. Michael Glass, a WDSHS microbiologist, reported that L. pneumophila was present in 52 percent of samples—numbering in the hundreds—collected from Spirit Lake between 1983 and 1986. Glass identified six other Legionella species, two of which (L.gormanii and L. longbeachae) are also human pathogens. Two new species were named: Legionella sainthelensi and L. spiritensis.

Public health investigators noted that people who contracted the illness were mostly scientists working in close proximity to blast-zone lakes and rivers. They hypothesized that mists generated at these sites by turbulent streams and waterfalls and, especially, the rotor blasts of nearby helicopters enabled exposure to the disease organisms. Legionnaires’ disease is not caused merely by the presence of Legionella, but by contact with bacteria-bearing aerosols in mist-filled air that people breath in.

The occurrence of Legionnaires’ disease was never proven, although the WDSHS conceded that the illness could have been a “mild form” of the disease, which the agency called “Red Zone Fever.” Had Legionnaires’ disease been confirmed, state and federal health authorities would have closed the blast zone for months or longer until the disease threat had abated. Closure would have put the Corps at loggerheads with its Congressional mandate in the blast zone—that is, to control flooding and mudflows, remove sediment blocking navigable rivers, repair or replace bridges and roads and provide damage assessments, all without delay to protect lives and property. Ironically, the threat of Legionnaires’ disease was a major hook that got us more money for lake research. - Douglas Larson


WDSHS called on the Tacoma Water Resources Division office in early summer 1981 to collect blood samples from all of us Yacht Clubbers.  
Ron Lombard was the resident quipster back in our corner of the office, and he immediately told the blood takers that his sample was sure to be 80 Proof. Ron added that the only time he felt crappy was when confined to the office, not when plying Mount St. Helens’ waters or sinking in her ooze. No one in our corner became sick, and the samples were messed up at the lab anyhow.

Here is a link to Larson’s American Scientist article, Science After the Volcano Blew 





The Spirit Lake story will continue on Day 92, June 19…the accelerated lake filling and rapidly increasing volume; the race to install a pumping station to maintain a safe water level; and the boring of an outlet tunnel under Harry’s Ridge. 
Tomorrow’s presentation (Day 91) is full of June 18, 1980 photographs of the battered GMC pickup found near Hanaford Lake belonging to William and Jean Parker, and the crushed sedan near Meta Lake belonging to Florence Creek miners Donald and Natalie Parker.   

Links to pre-eruption references and maps
1919 Mount St. Helens
Volcano Watch  Ray Claude
Digital Terrain Model
Lakes in WA Volume 4 
Geologic map USGS 02-468 
1958 15-minute maps
USGS Profess. Paper 1249
USGS Bulletin 1383-C
Volcano Watch Ray Claude 
Bulge Deformation Map I-1411

Links to post-eruption references and maps
WA State DNR Information Circular 71
USGS Open-File Report 96-677
USGS Professional 
Paper 1249
USGS Mount St. Helens post-eruption 7.5’ maps
USGS Professional 
Paper 1250
Plate 1    
USGS Professional Paper 1250
USGS Professional 
Paper 1387
USGS Circular 850-B
USGS Circular 850-C
USGS Water Resources Investigations Report 85-4080 

Links to post-eruption lakes references
USGS Water Resources Investigations Report 87-4263
Sedimentation in Blast-Zone Coldwater Lake
Alternative Strategies for a Spirit Lake Outlet  
US Corps of Engineers
USGS Professional 
Paper 1345
USGS Circular 850-G
USGS Open-File Report 2017-1145
USGS Water Resources Investigations Report 87-4272
USGS Open-File Report 82-771 
USGS Scientific Investigations Report 2017–5022–E
USGS Water Resources Investigations Report 91-4028
