1919 USGS Mount St. Helens 1:125000 topographic quadrangle

1958 USGS Mount St. Helens 15-minute topographic quadrangle

Day 2     March 21, 1980  Friday  
Evidence of aftershocks persisted this morning in the record being transmitted by the Mount St. Helens seismic station. Scientists at the UW contacted the Forest Service in Vancouver for assistance in locating additional seismic stations (because of snowy conditions) and were told that the earthquakes had caused large avalanches yesterday on Mount St. Helens. Working together, the USGS and University of Washington scientists installed four additional seismic stations near Mount St. Helens. Three of these stations (one each a few miles east, north, and south of the volcano) are designed to begin recording as soon as they detect a shock and to continue operating unattended for five days unless they are reset. The other station, about 20 miles to the northeast, will automatically transmit electronic signals of earth movements to the seismology center in Seattle.

Day 3     March 22   Saturday  
A field trip has been arranged for tomorrow to collect records from the 5-day recording instruments in the hope of determining a more precise location for today's Magnitude 4 earthquake.  A second earthquake greater than magnitude 4 occurred today, together with many smaller ones similar to those occurring on Thursday. Seismologists decided that this event was not a single large quake with smaller aftershocks but an earthquake swarm consisting of many separate events. Scientists at the University of Washington advised the Forest Service's avalanche warning center in Seattle that the possibility of continuing earthquake-triggered avalanches on Mount St. Helens was high.


Day 4     March 23  Sunday   
Visits to the seismic stations near Mount St. Helens today were frustrating. All three recording seismographs installed on Friday were not working properly, two because of bad batteries. Thus, no records are available from them to help pinpoint the source of yesterday's large shock.   
Meanwhile, seismic data being received at Seattle show a sharp increase in earthquake activity. Five quakes greater than magnitude 3 were recorded today, including (shortly after 2000 hours tonight) the third one greater than magnitude 4.  

[all from Volcanic Eruptions of 1980 at Mount St. Helens; The First 100 Days  U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1249]


1910  Redrock Pass and Mount St. Helens from the south.  MSHNVM

1912  Mount St. Helens and Shoestring Glacier from the east at Twin Buttes.  MSHNVM

1919 USGS Mount St. Helens 1:125000 quadrangle

1926 USGS Steamboat Mtn 1:125000
Here are links to the 1919 Mount St. Helens topographic and its twin, the 1926 Mount Adams map. 
Clink on maps to open the full-size USGS link.

Bumping out the map to include half of Mount Adams was a nice touch, along with the striking blue and brown contour lines.


Mount St. Helens, Oregon  1899

Mount St. Helens, Oregon  1901
Oregon??

Links to pre-eruption references and maps
1919 Mount St. Helens
1958 Mount St. Helens maps
USGS Profess. Paper 1249
Volcano Watch   Ray Claude
USGS Professional Paper 1249 by Mary Hill and Bruce Foxworthy was published in 1982. The report was unusual for the Professional Paper series, describing Mount St. Helens’ events for the nontechnical reader. PP 1249 was a backdrop for more technically written scientific reports on the volcanic activity and the geologic and hydrologic effects of the 1980 eruptions. Hill and Foxworthy’s information sources ranged from scientific publications prepared years before the 1980 eruptions to oral accounts, news releases, and data obtained after the major eruptions. 
Volcano Watch: Mount St. Helens by Ray Claude.   Ray’s son, Houston, writes…
Ray spent a lot of time down in Olympia focusing on mineral and geology research with State Geologist Ray Lasmanis and Rudy Tsernich. Ray's passion for geology and the outdoors took us on decades of explorations across the Pacific Northwest. Moving to Washington shortly after the eruption of Mt St Helens, we spent the next thirty years learning and collecting. With the accumulation of experience, he began applying his skills as a technical writer to author several books on rockhounding and geology in Washington. I was lucky to see the things that we found over the years, and fortunate to have inherited the same curiosity and stubbornness that drives me to keep exploring.
