April 5, 1980  Geologist exposing cross-section in snowbank at Timberline, showing alternating layers of ash and snow.  USGS R.P. Hoblitt  msh_hrp00145_ct

April 5, 1980  Near view of upper portion of cross-section showing alternating snow and ash layers. Ruler for scale.  USGS R.P. Hoblitt  msh_hrp00146_ct

April 5, 1980  Near view showing pumice mixed with snow and ash layers.  USGS R.P. Hoblitt  msh_hrp00147_ct

Day 17     April 5, 1980  Saturday
USGS daily report
At least three eruptions sent ash to altitudes of about 15,000 feet today, and scientists using airborne measuring devices detected low concentrations of sulfur dioxide in the plume. Only four earthquakes today reached magnitude 4.0 or greater. Harmonic tremor occurred for 16 minutes shortly before noon. Sixty Washington National Guardsmen took up duties this morning at four roadblocks on major routes to Mount St. Helens. They immediately moved two of the roadblocks farther away from the mountain to allow them better control of side roads leading to the volcano and placed some of the most congested viewing spots off limits. 
Scientists and technicians have been working long hours in the field under difficult and often risky conditions. When the weather permits, some are flown by helicopter from Vancouver to various places on the mountain or to nearby sites such as Timberline or Spirit Lake. If expensive helicopter support is not available, investigators must make long drives to the volcano, from headquarters in Seattle and Tacoma as well as in Vancouver. Ground travel away from the vehicles usually involves trudging through deep snow. Heavy rain or snowfall, often accompanied by bitter wind, is common in the area. When bad storms hit, fieldworkers use tents and umbrellas to shelter sensitive instruments during measurements. Fieldwork includes visiting instrument sites to change batteries and calibrate instruments already in place or to install additional instruments; photographing the widening crevasses in the upper glaciers; making measurements of gravity and magnetic field with portable instruments; and sampling and measuring fumarole gases, volcanic ash, and the flow of streams draining from the mountain. Some of the work must be done on avalanche-prone slopes while the upper parts of the mountain are hidden in clouds. 

At such times, the sudden, strong earthquakes can be startling. During good weather, helicopters ferry scientists from one site to another during the day and return them to Vancouver in the evening. The helicopter flights are made during the daylight hours, but the long drives to and from the area often begin and end in darkness. Scientists then conduct evening conferences to review the day's activities. Fourteen-hour working days are common; clockwatching is mainly for timing scientific observations and resetting instruments. 
Most scientists, however, prefer the hardships and long hours in the field to remaining at the Vancouver office and being besieged by news reporters, who persist in asking questions that the scientists cannot answer about what the volcano will do next.   [USGS PP 1249]

April 5, 1980 Saturday 
TNT news clipping

April 5, 1980 Saturday TNT news clipping

Historic photographs
The old, one-lane gravel road up the North Fork Toutle River valley to the south shore of Spirit Lake was paved in 1946, becoming known as Spirit Lake Highway 504. A newly paved road to Timberline was dedicated in September 1962 to replace the old wagon and snow cat track which had been used for many years to take skiers to the volcano’s higher slopes.  

I came across the very last photograph in the Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument archives and it stopped me in my tracks. 
Holy Smokes, that's my Mom and Dad!  Wait, no it's not! 
I had my sister Susan and cousin Robert totally going on this for a while. Susan sniffed out the fake before too long, mostly because our parents Lynn and Don had never strapped on a pair of skis in their lives. 
This pair from the Longview Ski Club are their perfect Doppelgangers though.




1930  Summer at Timberline  Mount St. Helens  MSHNVM

1965  The Arctic Cat above Spirit Lake.  Mount St. Helens  MSHNVM

1965  Timberline parking lot and Windy Pass at left.  MSHNVM

Road from Spirit Lake to Timberline.  not dated  Mary & Ron Rinear Collection

1970  Timberline parking area on 
northeast flank below Mount St. Helens.  
Gifford Pinchot NF 504360

pre-eruption inner tubers and the Sugar Bowl on Mount St. Helen's lower flank.  not dated  Jennings P. Foley, Jr.

1971  Snow camp on north side of Mount St. Helens.  Gifford Pinchot NF 529554

1972  The road to Timberline, with a view of the Dog’s Head and the Forsyth Glacier.  MSHNVM

1950  Longview Ski Club  MSHNVM

Links to pre-eruption references and maps
1919 Mount St. Helens
1958 Mount St. Helens maps
USGS Profess. Paper 1249
Volcano Watch   Ray Claude
Digital Terrain Model
USGS Bulletin 1383-C
