May 11, 1980  Phreatic eruption from Coldwater II observation station. 1757 hours.  USGS  cvoe00005_ct

May 11, 1980 Sunday  Looking east to Mount Adams. Crescent Ridge in lower right.  Al Hayward

Day 53     May 11, 1980  Sunday

USGS daily report   Although the crater emitted only small bursts of steam and ash, ten earthquakes of magnitude 4.0 or greater occurred again today. Increased steaming observed at the hot area on upper Shoestring Glacier may indicate changes in the distribution of heat inside the volcano, according to USGS volcanologist Johnston. Volcanic-hazard scientists and public safety officials are feeling the pressures of responsibility these days. They believe that the volcano is capable of producing dangerous avalanches, mudflows, and explosive eruptions, and they are striving to give realistic warnings and to provide adequate protection for the public. At the same time, they recognize that personal hardships and economic loss to local individuals and businesses could result from an overreaction to the hazards.
Scientists hope to provide advance warning of any impending disaster. They are watching the mountain closely from the observation post at Coldwater II, which is being manned 24 hours a day. Also, a Forest Service observation airplane is in the air around the mountain almost continuously when weather permits. In addition, instruments such as the telemetering seismometers remain "on duty" and are closely monitored around the clock. Most USGS and University of Washington scientists who are studying the volcano believe that any major eruption would be preceded by a change in the seismic activity or in the rate of bulging; therefore, they believe that they can give adequate warning if a dangerous eruption occurs. If, however, earthquake patterns do not change before the onset of a major event (such as the expected massive avalanche or if the event occurs when visibility is hampered by darkness or clouds), even scientifically trained volcano watchers may not be able to give warning.    [USGS PP 1249]

May 11, 1980 Sunday TNT news clipping


May 11, 1980 Sunday TNT news clipping

May 11, 1980 Sunday 
TNT news clipping

May 11, 1980 Sunday TNT news clipping

Historic photographs
Wow! That was a nice and very slow trip around the volcano…it took almost two full weeks (since April 29) to circumnavigate Mount St. Helens. Actually, I think that sounds about right. The Loowit trail wraps around the mountain for 33 miles, so we were traveling at the blistering pace of 2.5 miles per day. Gotta have time to take pictures and watch the clouds, you know.

On the far side of the Dog’s Head dome are the Nelson and Ape Glaciers...and there's the famous Shoestring Glacier again. 

September 1964  Mount St. Helens, aerial photograph taken from the northeast.  USGS D.R. Mullineaux  vhp_img995


1970  Mount St. Helens  Aerial view of east flank in winter.  MSHNVM

1970  The southeast flank of Mount St. Helens and the Shoestring Glacier from Mount Adams.  MSHNVM 

North/Northeast flank of Mount St. Helens  1958 USGS Mount St. Helens 15-minute topographic map

Links to pre-eruption references and maps
1919 Mount St. Helens
1958 Mount St. Helens maps
USGS Profess. Paper 1249
Volcano Watch   Ray Claude
Digital Terrain Model
USGS Bulletin 1383-C
Lakes in Washington Vol 4 
Geologic map  USGS 02-468 
