1911  High Rock and Mount St. Helens from 50 miles due North.  MSHNVM 

Mount St. Helens from Indian Henry's Hunting Ground. Silver Gelatin print.  1909



Day 31     April 19,1980  Saturday
USGS daily report
Seismographs today recorded about the same amount of earthquake activity as they have in recent days - 37 earthquakes greater than magnitude 3, including eight greater than magnitude 4. One earthquake this afternoon reached magnitude 4.9, equaling the strongest to date. No harmonic tremor has appeared in the past week. Local scientists who are most familiar with the shape of Mount St. Helens are saying that the upper northern side of the mountain obviously has moved outward (northward), but they are not unanimous about cause and effect. Some believe that the outward displacement is caused by the downward-settling mass of the summit graben (wedge). Others believe that intruding magma is inflating the mountain and causing a spreading of the summit that allows the graben to subside. Snow surveyors from the U.S. Soil Conservation Service, who periodically measure snow depth and water content in order to predict snow-water resources, have been observing the melting rate of the ash-rich snow near Mount St. Helens. They reported recently that the snow is melting faster where it is covered by the dark ash because it absorbs more heat from the sun than the clean snow does. Whether spring runoff this year will be faster and the danger of flooding greater are still uncertain because much of the water melted at the snow surface can be held in lower parts of the snowpack. USGS hydrologists report no evidence of unusual runoff at their stream gaging stations so far.   [USGS PP 1249]

April 19, 1980 Saturday TNT news clipping

Historic photographs
The following photograph with the thick lenticular cap cloud on the volcano is rare among the many pre-eruption pictures I’ve seen. I’m still not entirely sure it hasn’t been altered. But Mr. Jim Nieland's classic shot of frozen Spirit Lake and the icy mountain from Harmony Falls is right after that. My photos never, ever turned out like his, and we were probably using the same film.  
Three aerials follow, with the Spirit Lake basin below the northeast and northwest flanks of the mountain. The Mount Margaret Backcountry lies just beyond Spirit Lake.






1950  Lenticular cap cloud on summit of Mount St. Helens.  MSHNVM

1979  Frozen Spirit Lake and Mount St. Helens from Harmony Falls.  USFS J. Nieland  MSHNVM  

Pre-eruption aerial over northwest flank of Mount St. Helens and the Goat Rocks with Spirit Lake below.  USGS

Mount Rainier and Spirit Lake from Dog's Head, northeast side of Mount St. Helens.
Timberline parking lot in lower right.  USGS  R.R. Adsit Collection

1978  Frozen Spirit Lake and Mount Rainier in background.  MSHNVM

Camps, Campgrounds, and Lodges on pre-eruption Spirit Lake 

Links to pre-eruption references and maps
1919 Mount St. Helens
1958 Mount St. Helens maps
USGS Profess. Paper 1249
Volcano Watch   Ray Claude
Digital Terrain Model
USGS Bulletin 1383-C
Lakes in Washington Vol 4 
