Dee Molenaar  Pre-eruption oblique painting of Mount St. Helens, Spirit and Saint Helens Lakes.  USGS

Day 15     April 3, 1980  Thursday
USGS daily report
Washington Governor Dixy Lee Ray today declared a state of emergency and set up a "Mount St. Helens Watch Group." Local officials in both Washington and Oregon issued leaflets prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency entitled "What To Do During a Volcano Ashfall. " The leaflet gives advice on the dangers of ashfalls, mudflows, and floods. 
Seismographs recorded six earthquakes of magnitude 4.0 and greater, the strongest of which was 4.6. Two more bursts of harmonic tremor occurring this evening indicate continued movement of magma beneath the mountain. The 33-minute total duration of today's harmonic tremor is more than double last evening's episode. Airborne observers reported that the crater has enlarged to a diameter of about 1,500 feet and a depth of about 300 feet. Plumes of steam and ash billow from the crater almost hourly. Traces of volcanic ash fell in and near Tacoma, about 70 miles north of the mountain.   [USGS PP 1249]
[Check out this fun little story...more details in an upcoming Tacoma News Tribune news clipping, dated April 7, 1980]   Driving down the Spirit Lake Highway, Rick Hoblitt of the USGS stopped for a longhair in beret and backpack. Young Fred Miller, caked in ash. He’d hitchhiked from Snohomish on April Fool’s Day, thumbed a ride up the South Fork Toutle River and climbed to treeline on April 2nd. Today he had trudged a long spiral to the summit. Still two craters, he reported, ice at their rims capped by fifteen feet of new rock. Rotten-egg gas wafted up from crevasses, and ash doused him on Dog’s Head. He had hiked thirteen miles down from Timberline, when Hoblitt picked him up. Hoblitt bought him dinner in Castle Rock and eagerly listened to Miller’s adventurous tale.  

[The following is a very concise version of the Native American story about Mount St. Helens...]
The Legend of Loo-wit
Native Americans named the volcano Lawetlat’la, “One from whom the smoke comes.” Lawetlat’la was also called Loo-Wit, “Keeper of the Fire” or Tah-One-Lat-Clah, “Fire Mountain.”  
According to Native American legend, Lawetlat’la was a very old woman. She made a deal with a spirit god, Tyee Sahale, and was turned into a woman both young and beautiful. Two supernatural warriors, Pahto and Wy’East, lived nearby and were both handsome and eligible suitors. Wy’East lived across the large river, so the spirit god built a bridge of stone so Wy’East could visit Lawetlat’la. Pahto lived to the east. Both of the warriors loved the young beauty, but she could not decide which one she loved best. Competing for her attention, the warriors began hurling fire, lightning, and hot rocks at each other. The sun was blocked and the ground shook so badly that the stone bridge collapsed. The Indian people were so frightened that they begged for help from the spirit god. In anger, he turned all three into stone. Wy’East became Mount Hood, Pahto became Mount Adams, and Lawetlat’la was turned into beautiful Mount St. Helens. 

[For more detailed version of the Loo-Wit legend, read:  
Mount St. Helens   A Changing Landscape   by Chuck Williams]

The first documented observation of the volcano by a European was by seafaring explorer George Vancouver on May 19, 1792 as he was charting inlets in Puget Sound. One of Vancouver’s lieutenants, William Broughton, soon after named the mountain on October 20, 1792, when it came into view as his British Royal Navy ship passed the mouth of the Columbia River. Broughton named the peak Mount St. Helens, in honor of a fellow countryman, Alleyne Fitzherbert (1753-1839), who held the title Baron St. Helens of the Isle of Wight and was the British Ambassador at the Court of Madrid, Spain.

On November 4, 1805 and March 30, 1806, Lieutenant William Clark of the Lewis and Clark Expedition wrote, 
“It is emensely (sp) high and covered with snow.” “…a kind of cone in the form of a Sugar lofe…the most noble looking object of its kind in nature.”


Historic photographs
A few photographs by some big figures in Pacific Northwest volcano and mountain research and literature.
Donal Mullineaux and Dwight Crandell, who researched and authored USGS Bulliten 1383-C that was earlier discussed (see the Day 8 March 27 post), took the first two photos. Goat Marsh, on the southwest side of the volcano in the upper Kalama River drainage, is an amazing place. Several of the largest Noble Firs in the world (including the largest) are preserved in the Goat Marsh Research Area. The preserve contains the densest stand of trees in Washington State, and is exceeded only by some groves of California Coastal Redwoods and Sequoias. 
Dee Molenaar took the fourth photograph. Dee wrote the classic "The Challenge of Rainier" and was a climbing ranger at Paradise on Mount Rainier before joining the USGS. Dee was a famed mountaineer, and was a member of the 1953 American K2 Expedition to the world’s second tallest peak. "The Savage Mountain", by expedition leader Dr. Charles S. Houston, is also a classic. It tells the story of their attempt on K2 (Mount Godwin-Austen), and about the most famous belay in mountaineering history. Dee was also a prolific artist, and his paintings and drawings adorned countless mountaineering guidebooks and USGS publications. Many of Dee’s paintings will be shared in these Mount St. Helens posts, like his oblique painting of the volcano and Spirit Lake which begins today’s story.  
A bunch of the employees at the USGS office in downtown Tacoma would find free parking way up the steep South 13th Street hill. My cousin Tom Drake and I loved watching Dee climb to his car at the end of the work day. We were in our early 20s, Dee was in his early 60s, and we had no chance of keeping up with him. Nobody did. 
Dee passed away in 2020 at the age of 101. The Seattle Times honored him with a Sunday front-page story.

Goat Marsh  1919 USGS Mount St. Helens topographic map

May 1964  Aerial view looking east at Mount St. Helens. Mount Adams in the background.  
USGS  Donal Mullineaux  msh_mdr00005_ct

1978  Goat Marsh Lake and Mount St. Helens. The marsh is 5 miles southwest of the volcano.  
USGS  Dwight R. Crandell  msh_1249_00004_ct

Goat Marsh Research Area and Colleen

October 1977  Aerial view of Mount St. Helens from the west.  Mount Adams in the background.   USGS  Dee Molenaar  msh_1249_00003_ct

Map of the rivers originating from Mount St. Helens 

Links to pre-eruption references and maps
1919 Mount St. Helens
1958 Mount St. Helens maps
USGS Profess. Paper 1249
Volcano Watch   Ray Claude
Digital Terrain Model
USGS Bulletin 1383-C
