May 14, 1980  Aerial view of crater bottom and phreatic eruption, looking east.  USGS J.G. Rosenbaum  msh_rj000020_ct

May 14, 1980  Aerial view of phreatic eruption, looking southeast.  USGS J.G. Rosenbaum  msh_rj000021_ct

May 14, 1980  Another aerial view of phreatic eruption, looking south.  USGS J.G. Rosenbaum  msh_rj000022_ct

Day 56     May 14, 1980  Wednesday

USGS daily report
Although bad weather obscured the volcano more than half of today, observers did see some eruptions of steam and ash. They noted one new steaming vent between the two small peaks just north of the northern crater rim, along part of the fault system and summit graben. Instruments show that the northern flank continues to swell at a rate of about five feet a day and that seismicity is about the same or slightly less than it has been in recent days.

Scientists from Dartmouth College, who are cooperating with the USGS in studying gas from the volcano, report that sulfur dioxide (S02) is being emitted at rates of 10 to 20 metric tons a day during the eruptive pulses and about one ton a day between eruptions. These S02 rates are much higher than those estimated from samples collected on March 30 (0.3 ton a day). Because volcanic SO2 requires a very high temperature source, the increased emission of this gas might indicate that the magma is moving closer to the surface.   [USGS PP 1249]

May 14, 1980 Wednesday TNT news clipping  

Historic photographs
I saved the best pre-eruption story for last...
Mary and Ron Rinear built a cabin at Maple Flats on the North Fork Toutle River in 1973-1974. They both loved to fish, and the North Fork and its nearby tributary, the Green River, were fishing nirvana. Ron’s pal from high school, Blair Barner, built an A-Frame cabin right next door to Mary and Ron’s new place. Mary and Ron and their children and friends enjoyed many adventure-packed times at their getaway. They built the cabin by themselves, with some help from a very friendly Robin. Ron says that he would arrive for the weekend and the Robin would just hang around like a dog, but they always worried it would get hurt in the construction zone. Time was always saved for fishing, especially on the legendary Green. The cabin and A-Frame are at river mile 10 on the North Fork Toutle above the confluence with the South Fork. Spirit Lake is at river mile 38. 

Mary helped open the doors at Evergreen Forest Elementary (my school) in 1978 and still substitutes regularly. Mary taught legions of Kindergarteners and First Graders, and everyone remembers Mrs. Rinear with great affection. And Mrs. Rinear still keeps track of many of her once-tiny students. Mary grew up on Queen Anne Hill and went to the beautiful and famous Queen Anne High School on the top of the hill.
Ron grew up in Chehalis and spent most of his career in North Thurston teaching biology and coaching at Nisqually Junior High and North Thurston High School.
When Mary and I met in 1991, we pretty quickly realized our Mount St. Helens connection. Our regular USGS  helicopter meeting spot was right across the road from their cabin and Blair’s A-Frame.
When I was posting daily Mount St. Helens stuff for Evergreen Forest’s students and parents during the initial 

pandemic lockdown in spring 2020, Mary and Ron were major characters in the continuing story. I borrowed their many slide and photograph albums to digitize. I’d send the photos to Mary’s and Ron’s phones, and then they'd call and tell me each story in full detail as I wrote it all down. About every other week, we'd meet six feet apart in their driveway and talk, and they would often have a new box of photos for me to explore. One box was full of big, beautiful 11”x14” post-eruption black and whites that I will share later, post-eruption. 

1978  Mary Rinear with North Fork Toutle River steelhead.   
Mary & Ron Rinear Collection

Fall 1973  Ron Rinear and friendly Robin while building cabin at Maple Flats.  North Fork Toutle River.  
Mount St. Helens  Mary and Ron Rinear Collection

Fall 1973  Ron Rinear and friendly Robin while building cabin at Maple Flats. North Fork Toutle River.  
Mount St. Helens  Mary and Ron Rinear Collection

May 1976  Mary and Ron Rinear's cabin at Maple Flats, North Fork Toutle River.  Mary and Ron Rinear Collection

Mid-1970s  Blair Barner’s Red A-Frame ("Buried A-Frame" post--eruption) at Maple Flats, North Fork Toutle River  Mary and Ron Rinear Collection

April 1973  Frozen Spirit Lake and Allison Rinear. The Dome in background.  Mary and Ron Rinear Collection

Rinear cabin + Red A-Frame at Maple Flat  1953 USGS Toutle 15-minute topographic map

Links to pre-eruption references and maps
1919 Mount St. Helens
1958 Mount St. Helens maps
USGS Profess. Paper 1249
Volcano Watch   Ray Claude
Digital Terrain Model
USGS Bulletin 1383-C
Lakes in Washington Vol 4 
Geologic map  USGS 02-468 
