Cabin near confluence of North Fork Toutle River and Green River  May 1980  Mary & Ron Rinear Collection

Cheap Wheels!  Maple Flats  North Fork Toutle River  May 1980  Mary & Ron Rinear Collection

Day 70     May 28, 1980  Wednesday     
​
Mary and Ron Rinear took all of today's photographs through slide #12, either pre-eruption or in May/June 1980.
The next picture is of little Scott and Erin, two of Mary and Ron's four children. 
Mary took this photo of her kids in late summer 1980, across the street from their cabin at Maple Flats. I did not know her at that time, and we wouldn't meet until I joined the staff at Evergreen Forest Elementary in 1991.

When the Rinears loaned me their Mount St. Helens slides during the lockdown, I looked at them quickly at first without a projector, but noticed our regular Hughes 500D helicopter in the background behind Scott and Erin. I excitedly told Mary and Ron. A few weeks later I checked out their slides carefully, and spotted Ron Lombard behind the kids wearing the orange flotation jacket and yellow flight suit, and his customary yellow or red ball cap. Ron was one of my bosses at the USGS (actually, everybody was my boss). 
Funniest part of the story is Mary saying, "The man holding Scott, I have no idea who he is”, after I'd asked if that was Grandpa. 

We spent a whole lot of time waiting for our helicopters. The contracted company flew out of Scappoose, Oregon. We suspected that Scappoose is the summer fog capital of the world as perfect sunny mornings slipped away with our ride often grounded in a marine layer. 
Wandering around the buried Red A-Frame was a pastime and it was becoming a tourist attraction, but we would never go inside, bad karma. Oddly, I never took a photo of the cabin, but slide film was expensive. 

Rinear kids + Ron Lombard in background  late summer 1980  Mary and Ron Rinear Collection

  In Spring 2020, I posed the following question about the muddy red cabin in today’s first photograph to my students and parents that were reading my daily volcano posts… 
“Ron Rinear says this funny little red cabin was located on the North Fork Toutle River, close to where the Green River flows in. The door is facing downstream. Can you explain the difference in mud marks on the trees and on the house?”
Here are the student responses. Isabella's is priceless...and Madison's confident reply at the end is great. 

MADISON  May 18, 2020
I think the cabin got moved by the mudflow.
SOPHIA  May 18, 2020
Me to.
KEN TANNER  May 18, 2020
​It definitely was moved by the mudflow...but why doesn't the front of the cabin and door have a mudflow line like the trees?
ISABELLA  May 20, 2020
what mud flow?
MADISON  May 21, 2020
Did the cabin get lifted up in the beginning of the mudflow and then get stuck up in the trees for awhile?
KEN TANNER  May 21, 2020  Wow Madison! You need to be a Volcanologist and Hydrologist!
Mr. Ron Rinear tells the story like this (it's his picture)...the tiny cabin was located on the North Fork Toutle River 


very near to where the Green River flows in. The cabin was lifted up by the mudflow (the consistency was incredibly thick) and transported through an opening in the trees for about 200 feet! The cabin finally hit the tree by the front door in the picture and eventually settled down as the mudflow receded. The front door is pointed downstream. That is so cool that you figured it out. Congratulations!
MADISON  May 26, 2020
My little sister, Regan, and I did it together. It was an easy question.





Of all the photographs I've seen of channel scour on the North and South Fork Toutle Rivers and on the Main Branch, Ron & Mary’s photos are among the best, and the following “before and afters” perfectly tell the story. 

May 1975  Ron Rinear's former student fishing on Toutle River below forks for summer steelhead. 
Coal Bank Gorge near Harry Morgan Park.  Ron and Mary Rinear Collection

early June 1980  Channel scour post-eruption on Toutle River below forks. Coal Bank Gorge 
near Harry Morgan Park.   Ron and Mary Rinear Collection

May 1975  Pre-eruption Hollywood Gorge on Main Fork Toutle River.  Mary & Ron  Rinear Collection

June 1980  Post-eruption Hollywood Gorge on Main Fork Toutle River.   Mary & Ron Rinear Collection

June 1980  Scour on cliffs just below Green River confluence with North Fork Toutle. Mary & Ron Rinear Collection

June 1980  Scour on cliffs just below the Green River 
confluence with the North Fork Toutle River.   
Mary and Ron Rinear Collection

Rinear’s Cabin +
Blair’s A-Frame
Rinear cabin + Red A-Frame at Maple Flat  1998 USGS 7.5-minute topographic map  

Another Toutle River home that was lifted by the mudflow and carried to a new location before 
striking a tree and settling back down.  June 1980  USGS msh_1250_00100

USGS daily report
The amount of ash in the eruptive plumes has been generally decreasing since the last big ash eruption of May 25th, and little was emitted today. Although the weather has been poor for viewing the volcano, radar images by the Oregon Army National Guard showed an area that could be either a dome or a ridge of ash and pumice within the large amphitheater and south of its open end. During the night, observers using light-enhancing binoculars reported seeing bright spots in the crater, which led to speculation that molten lava may be nearing the surface of the crater floor. Seismicity was low, and quakes were centered near Mount Margaret to the north. Although two earthquakes were of magnitudes 4.0 and 3.8, seismologists found no indication that these were directly connected with the eruption of Mount St. Helens.
An evaluation committee, headed jointly by John Eliott Allen, professor emeritus at Portland State University, and retired Oregon State Geologist Ralph S. Mason, was formed to process applications for permission to conduct scientific research in the closed areas around Mount St. Helens. The committee was charged with making certain that the applications were for legitimate scientific research by competent scientists. The Mount St. Helens Technical Information Network issued its first bulletin-"The Nature of Mount St. Helens Ash." The ash from the May 18th eruption, it says, consists of three layers. The bottom layer, which erupted first from the volcano, is a dark-gray ash composed of tiny fragments of older rocks and mineral crystals. The middle layer is a mixture of pumice and crystal fragments. The top layer, which forms the bulk of the ash that overlies much of eastern Washington and Idaho, is a light-gray ash composed mainly of fine particles of volcanic glass and mineral crystals. Geologist Washburn of the Washington Department of Transportation, stationed at Yakima, described the thickness of the three layers that fell on that city as about one-sixteenth inch for the dark basal layer, about 

one-half inch for the middle layer of "beach sand-size" particles, and only a "final dusting" of the upper fine, light-gray ash. Although too few analyses of the ash have been made to predict long-term effects, two fears were allayed. First, the ash is not sufficiently acidic to form "acid rain" or to increase the acidity of streams and lakes markedly. Second, the fluorine content is low; thus, the amount of fluorine leached from the ash will not be significantly greater than the amount of fluorine found in fluoridated city water systems. The amount of free silica in the ash, which might constitute a long-term health problem, and the quantity of trace elements are still being studied and debated. In its second bulletin, the Technical Information Network gave "Precautions for Handling Volcanic Ash." These precautions include moving the ash only in well-ventilated areas or outdoors, keeping it wetted if possible, and using dust masks to protect respiratory systems. All of Washington and eight Idaho counties are now considered disaster areas by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. About 300 houses in western Washington have been destroyed or badly damaged, mostly by floods and mudflows, according to estimates prepared by the American Red Cross and the Skamania County Assessor. The Washington Department of Emergency Services estimated private timber loss at about $143 million. The death toll reached 22 when one man, hospitalized earlier for burns, died today.   [USGS PP 1249]


May 28, 1980  The search for the missing and dead involves precarious helicopter landings and difficult hikes in ash-turned-mud that is sometimes solid, sometimes like quicksand, sometimes several feet thick.  GPNF 529556

May 28, 1980  Pilot Frank Patton from the Army's 3rd Squadron, 5th Air Cavalry Regiment maintains visual contact with three choppers flying the 30 miles from Salkum to the Elk Lake area on a search mission.  GPNF 529555


May 28, 1980 Wednesday TNT news clipping


continued
May 28, 1980 Wednesday 
TNT news clipping

May 28, 1980 Wednesday TNT news clipping

     






Do you remember the photograph of the giant green forest above Spirit Lake’s Bear Cove taken on May 17, the day before the cataclysmic eruption?
The two "after" photographs show hummocks deposited by the Debris Avalanche after it slid into Spirit Lake and buried the lakebed with material up to 320 feet thick. The debris avalanche flowed nearly a mile up Bear Creek beyond the pre-eruption northern shoreline in the West Arm. The hillsides were swept clean down to bedrock by the wave of water pushed out of the lakebed and 860 feet up and across the mountain slopes on the Eagle Point Peninsula. Spirit Lake’s water then rushed back in and sloshed, eroding the hummocks into conical shapes and stranding logs on top of several. The sloshing of the massive wave also cut deep box canyons. 
There are many places around the volcano changed or created by the 1980 eruption…the brand new lakes behind blocked-off tributaries, gigantic voids and colorful ponds in the debris avalanche, and the many effects of the lateral pyroclastic surge, but the conical hummocks at the head of the West Arm are the most fascinating of all to me. 
We'll revisit the Bear Cove hummocks along with post-eruption Spirit Lake.
Spirit Lake Unit
Coldwater
Ridge Unit
Marginal Unit
Slide Block I
North Fork
Unit
Mudflow Unit
Slide Blocks II, III
The Debris Avalanche   
Part III
Distal Unit

West Arm of Spirit Lake and Mount Margaret Backcountry.  May 17, 1980  1536 hours  USGS C.D. Miller msh_mcd00042_ct

Debris Avalanche hummocks in West Arm of Spirit Lake (Bear Cove). The Debris Avalanche was driven through Spirit Lake’s water and nearly a mile up Bear Creek drainage beyond former the lakeshore. When the displaced wave of water returned to its new lake bed, the hummocks were eroded into conical spires. The Dome on left.  July 2, 1980  USGS  R.L. Schuster  msh_srl00013_ct  

Debris Avalanche hummocks in Bear Cove (West Arm of Spirit Lake).  1981  USFS J. Nieland  MSHNVM

Debris Avalanche hummocks in Bear Cove at head of West Arm of Spirit Lake.  August 1981  USGS K. Tanner

Erosion on the bed of a drained lake formed in Debris Avalanche in the North Fork Toutle River valley.  1983  Emmet Gowin

Void in Debris Avalanche deposit. Note lighter Pumiceous Pyroclastic Flow on top of darker debris avalanche material, and person standing at left.  summer 1980  Jan Fardell

Giant void in Debris Avalanche deposit  
June 1980  Jan Fardell

On the slopes of Mount St. Helens, colorful ponds dot the debris avalanche, their chemical composition varying wildly and affecting the color of the water.  August 8, 1981  USGS  L. Topinka

Pond and hummocks in the Debris Avalanche deposit.  1984  MSHNVM

Three colored ponds in the Debris Avalanche deposit blocking Spirit Lake.  summer 1981  USGS K. Tanner

Every flight up the North Fork Toutle valley to Spirit Lake took us right past the "Stranded Logs" and I was continually intrigued. The stranded logs are on a terrace where the debris avalanche slammed into and pushed up against South Coldwater (Johnston) Ridge, almost directly below the present-day Loowit Viewpoint and the Observatory. The logs are still present 45 years later but will someday soon be completely covered with vigorously growing willow. 
The debris avalanche ran up the ridge here and "fell back", trapping the logs in their unusual resting place where absolutely no other logs or stumps or anything but ash and rock were present. In several places around the blast zone, logjams were left on flat terraces or low areas in small basins, but not as dramatically as this pile of trees stuck on the edge. The logjams appeared to have been moved by water, but were all found completely dry within days after the eruption. The logs rode currents of superfine, superhot ash that drifted down from ridges and slopes to lower lying areas. The fallback terrace and other nearby features reached amazing depths as the material piled back onto deposits left only minutes before. 
The fallback terrace and stranded logs lay at 3305 feet in elevation, 530 feet above a buried tributary stream valley formerly at 2775 feet, near its pre-eruption confluence with the North Fork Toutle River.  
The giant nearby avalanche hummock measures 640 feet from its top (3564’) to the pre-eruption forest floor (2920’). This lofty hummock was pushed upward as the avalanche contacted South Coldwater Ridge, so the hummock noted in yesterday’s post (Point 3507, 1.5 miles to the east and closer to Spirit Lake) is truly the deepest spot in the Debris Avalanche deposit. The hummock near the stranded logs has always reminded me of the classic wind-sculpted crescent-shaped Barchan dunes, but it’s so perfectly cleaved on the eastern side and unlike any of the other 685 hummocks.              

Logs stranded on "fallback" terrace. North Fork Toutle River valley, below South Coldwater (Johnston) Ridge. Depth of deposit under stranded logs is 530 feet to pre-eruption valley floor. summer 1981  USGS  K. Tanner

Stranded logs on debris avalanche fallback terrace below South Coldwater Ridge.  June 25, 2018  K. Tanner

Stranded logs at end of fallback terrace and “Barchan dune-like” debris avalanche hummock.  May 27, 2020  K. Tanner  

Stranded logs on fallback terrace and “Barchan dune-like” debris avalanche hummock.  May 11, 2024  K. Tanner  

Stranded logs on fallback terrace and “Barchan dune-like” debris avalanche hummock.  May 27, 2020  K. Tanner

May 23, 1980  Debris avalanche and pumiceous pyroclastic flow deposits banked against South Coldwater (Johnston) Ridge.  USGS C.D. Miller  mmil0048

May 23, 1980  Debris avalanche and pumiceous pyroclastic flow deposits banked against South Coldwater (Johnston) Ridge.  USGS C.D. Miller  mmil0048
“Barchan dune-like” debris avalanche hummock
Debris Avalanche and pyroclastic flow deposits
North Fork Toutle valley 
South Coldwater Ridge
“The Spillover”
depositional ramp
“Stranded Logs” on
Fallback Terrace
Point 3507

November 24, 1980  Looking down the Debris Avalanche in the North Fork Toutle River valley.  Jan Fardell


Coldwater II
South Coldwater
(Johnston) Ridge
Pre- and post-eruption South Coldwater Ridge and North Fork Toutle River 
“Barchan Dune-like” hummock
3564 feet
Stranded logs
3305 feet
2775 feet
2920 feet

If you need some in depth reading about the debris avalanche, this link to Harry Glicken's research is the real deal...
Rockslide-Debris Avalanche of May 18, 1980, Mount St. Helens Volcano, Washington
USGS Open-file Report 96-677   Harry Glicken   Published 1996 
ROCKSLIDE-DEBRIS AVALANCHE OF MAY 18, 1980, MOUNT ST. HELENS VOLCANO, WASHINGTON

Isopach map of the May 18, 1980 Debris Avalanche deposit
-zoom in on the isopach map in the link to view depth contours of the debris avalanche deposit
OFR 96-677 Plate 1 

OFR 96-677 
Plate 3
Links to other 96-677 plates…

Plate 2

Plate 4a

Plate 4b

Plate 5a

Plate 5b

Tomorrow May 29   The Pyroclastic Density Current (Lateral Pyroclastic Surge)

Links to pre-eruption references and maps
1919 Mount St. Helens
Volcano Watch  Ray Claude
Digital Terrain Model
Lakes in WA Volume 4 
Geologic map USGS 02-468 
1958 15-minute maps
USGS Profess. Paper 1249
USGS Bulletin 1383-C
Volcano Watch Ray Claude 
Bulge Deformation Map I-1411

Links to post-eruption references and maps
WA State DNR Information Circular 71
USGS Open-File Report 96-677
USGS Professional 
Paper 1249
USGS Mount St. Helens post-eruption 7.5’ maps
USGS Professional 
Paper 1250
Plate 1    
USGS Professional Paper 1250
